                                                                          38468




     Agricultural Extension Services In Indonesia:

NEW APPROACHES AND 

  EMERGING ISSUES 





May 2007




       The World Bank
       East Asia and Pacific Region
       Rural Development, Natural Resources and Environment Sector Unit
       Sustainable Development Department
                                                      ~             AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                           NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




                                ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

                                .
This report is a product of the World Bank's Rural Development, l'\atural Resources and Environment
Sector Unit ofthe East Asia and Pacific Region under the Raising Rural Productivity (P090503) umbrella
AAA. This report draws on two core reports that were coordinated by EASRE: (i) Impact Evaluation
of the Decentralized Agricultural and Forestry Extension Project - DAFEP (December 2006) carried
out by the French Agricultural Research Centre for International Development - Centre de cooperation
internationale en recherche agronomique pour Ie developpement (CIRAD) and (ii) Decentralization and
Agricultural Service Delivery - Benchmarks, Transfers and Capacity Building in Intergovernmental
Relations (June 2004) by the Social Monitoring and Economic Research Unit (SMERU), Jakarta.
In addition, various World Bank reports have also been drawn on. Dely Gapasin was responsible for
commissioning CIRAD to carry out the initial benchmark study in 2001. The DAFEP Impact Evaluation
finally saw the light ofday thanks to financial support from the following sources: TF053716 (Community
Driven Development Platform); TF054695 (Rural Investment Climate); TF051845 - Review of CDD
Impacts in East Asia Region (TFESSD- multiple donors), and CIRAD.The main results of this report
were presented at a workshop in \Vashington D.C during the Sustainable Development Network Week in
l'\ovember 2006. 'Jhe report benefited from the feedback and discussions during this workshop.

The team leader tor this report is Shobha Shetty (Sr. Economist, EASRE). The report was prepared
under the guidance of Rahul Raturi, Sector Manager, EASRE and Stephen Mink, Lead Economist,
EASRE. Peer reviewers were Gershon Feder (DECRG) and Riikka Rajalahti (ARD). Richard Chisholm
(Sr. Agriculturalist, EASRE) provided useful comments. Dewi Sutisna (EACIF) provided valuable
administrative assistance.

The variolls project staff of AAHRD provided unstinting support during the preparation ofthis evaluation.
PT Hutarnacipta Konsulindo and Surveymeter carried out the field survey at the benchmark and at the EoP
stages respectively. Anne Gouyon from Ideforce was involved in the pilot methodology and contributed to
improvements in many aspects of this work.

The support of Scott Guggenheim (Lead Social Development Specialist, EASSO), Susan Wong (Sr. Social
Development Specialist, EASSO),Jean-Guy Bertault (Regional Director CIRAD, South East Asia), and
Robin BourgeOiS (Sr. Economist, CIRAD) is gratefully acknowledged. Last but by no means least, this
work could not have been achieved without the understanding and cooperation of thousands of rural
households throughout Indonesia. Our grateful thanks to all of them for giving so generously of their time
and insights.




                                                                                                r'.cknowledgments   III
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES
                                                     J

                                  ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 



     AAHRD               Agency for Agricultural Human Resource Development
     ADB                 Asian Development Bank
     AIAT/BPTP           Assessment Institute for Agricultural Technology
     ARMP                Agricultural Research Management Project
     BIPP                District extension center
     BPP                 Sub-district extension center
     ClRAD               French Agricultural Research Centre for International Development
     DAFEP               Decentralized Agriculture and Forestry Extension Project
     DEC                 District Extension Committee
     EoP                 End of Project
     FEATI               Farmer Empowerment through Agricultural Technology and Information
     FO                  Farmers Organization
     FMA                 Farmer Managed Activity
     GoI                 Government of Indonesia
     lAARD               Indonesian Agency for Agricultural Research and Development
     ICR                 Implementation Completion Report
     Logit               Binary Logistic Regression Model
     NGO                 Non-governmental organization
     PIP                 Project Implementation Plan
     PPL                 Field extension worker
     PMU                 Project Management Unit
     RPO                 Rural Producers Organization
     RT/RW               Administrative and geographic subdivisions at village level
     UPKG                Village Extension Management Unit
     WE                  World Bank




     Cover photographs courtesy Robin Bourgeois, ClRAD




IV   Abbreviations and Acronyms
                                                         ~              AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                              NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




                                  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 


Indonesian agriculture is at a crossroads. Supporting the livelihood of millions of Indonesians, it needs
to underpin renewed and robust growth of the economy; and be a key component of the Government's
poverty alleviation strategy. The challenge for the future is to reinvigorate productivity gains among rural
producers, and provide the foundation for long run sustainability of these productivity gains. Productivity
gains are key to farmer income growth, and for this rebuilding the research and extension systems - that
have seen a marked deterioration in recent years - will be critical.

The experience of the Indonesian decentralization of its extension system has been mixed, with adverse
impact on extension through sharp reductions in funding, and removal of central-level guidance. At the
same time, a series of positive debates and experimentation in management have taken place from a shift
on top-down to participatory approaches, input and technology dissemination to dissemination of market
and upstream information and technology, from centrally managed extension services to decentralized
services, and some movement toward privatization of extension.

One such experimental approach was the World Bank-assisted DAFEP (Decentralized Agriculture and
Forestry Extension Project 2000-2005) which provided an impetus for demand-driven extension and
for institutional reforms at the local government level. The development objective of the Decentralized
Agricultural and Forestry Extension Project (DAFEP) was to assist the Government ofIndonesia (GoI)
in "... en.hancing farmers capacity to participate in extension activities, and in strengthening the capacity of
the districl-Ievel integrated agricultural andforestry extension system which would promote economically viable,
environmmtally sustainable, and socially acceptableforming practices and increasedfarmers income".

In this context, an assessment of the agricultural extension services, as seen through the lens of the impact
evaluation ofthe DAFEP project, was deemed to be timely and relevant. This report thus has the following
objectives:

   (i)     provide an overview of the institutional changes in agricultural extension in Indonesia;
   (ii)    present the results of the impact evaluation of DAFEP; and
   (iii)   discuss lessons learned and emerging issues in the new political and institutional context.

The Impact evaluation comprised a Benchmark survey (2001) and an End-of-Project (EOP) survey for
collection of data related to a set of indicators corresponding to the project expected outputs.


SAlVIPLINI:; l\IETliODOLOGY

The DAFEP Jample

The choice of the appropriate sampling size was based on the decision to use income dispersion as the
key variable whose variance will be used for setting the sample size so that it represents as much as
possible the whole project population. With 30 000 households directly targeted by the project, and a
95% confidence degree, a sample size of 400 randomly selected farmers was obtained. Due to possible
"losses" throughout the project duration, the sample was increased to 450. The field selection of villages
was based on the identification of districts and related sub-districts were the DAFEP was planned to be



                                                                                                   Executive Summary    V
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA ·
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES
                                                      J
     implemented, and to select sub-districts that were the most representative of the district agro-ecological
     and socioeconomic conditions. 'Extreme' sub-district situations were first discarded based on meetings
     with local key respondents and consultation oflocal secondary data. Then, the sub-districts were randomly
     drawn. In each selected sub-district the process was repeated for the village selection, discarding 'extreme'
     villages. At village level, respondent households were randomly drawn using the list of registered DAFEP
     members. Replacement households were also drawn in case of the impossibility of finding any households
     in the first list.




     For the purpose of the "with and without" comparison, a reference household sample of similar size and
     characteristics was selected with the same method in non-DAFEP districts. The process for selecting the
     respondent households mirrored the process used for selecting DAFEP households. The main difference
     was that the choice of district, sub-district and villages was conditioned by their resemblance to the
     district, sub-district and villages in the DAFEP sample. Then, at village level, respondent households were
     randomly selected from the list of village households, excluding known households that were known to
     be completely non farm households (for instance, pure traders or civil servants without any farm activity,
     neither the head of household nor the spouse or dependents were disregarded in the drawing). This was
     intended to minimize differences between DAFEP and Reference households due to agro-ecological and
     socioeconomic conditions.

     Ibe Spi1!o'l'er sample

     In addition, a Spillover sample was added to estimate whether the project had also generated indirect effects
     in the area of implementation. The Spillover sample was built as a mix of households not participating in
     DAFEP activities but located in areas where extension workers were part of the DAFEP project and had
     been trained in and promoting DAFEP approaches. This sample included thus three cases of non DAFEP
     households according to whether they were located either: a) in DAFEP villages, b) in non DAFEP
     villages but still in DAFEP sub-districts, and c) in non DAFEP sub-districts but still in DAFEP districts.
     However, the results from this sample were inconclusive/or of marginal importance and hence, are not
     presented in the main report.
     Impacts

     Income and Jf!elfare

     The analysis of the income data indicate that DAFEP was successful in significantly increasing farmer
     net crop income per hectare as well as non-farm income. In fact, non-farm incomes showed a significant
     increase across all samples. However, due to the problem of a Significant number of cultivated but non
     harvested parcels, a better proxy of farmer welfare was obtained through the use of expenditure data. Three
     indicators were used for impact assessment on welfare: yearly expenses, assets value and share of food
     expenses in total consumption expenses. The difference between Before and After situations for these three
     welfare indicators is significant for all samples. DAFEP households experienced a significant improvement
     oftheir welfare situation based on yearly expenses and asset value per capita, a result that is associated with
     the significant improvement in nonfarm income. A welfare distribution analysis based on Gini coefficient,
     Skewness and Kurtosis indicates that inequality decreased in all samplesflryearly expenses but it increased
     significantly for the DAFEP sample with regards to asset distribution compared to the Reference sample.
     However, since the trend is common to DAFEP and Spillover samples it is difficult to relate it with an
     effect of the project.




VI   Executive Surrmary
                                                        \..            AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                              NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




Productivity and Technology. The project was expected to generate a 5% increase in productivity of the
main farming systems by EoP. Using the gross value of all harvested crops per hectare and the yield of
the main crops (rice, maize, soybean and coconut) indicated that. Tests results indicate that there is no
significant change in the total value ofagriculturalproduction when comparing Before and After situation
in DAFEP and Reference samples while the Spillover sample experienced a significant decrease. Rice yield
has remained unchanged in all samples indicative of lack of up-take of improved technologies (including
improved seeds) and lack of irrigation. Percentage of area devoted to ricefell sharply in all three samples.
Only in the case of soybean yields a significant change can be observed in the DAFEP sample. DAFEP
households achieved an 8% agricultural growth but significant attribution can be made to the project.

Four proxy indicators were used as a measurement of technical changes: the total value ofinput per hectare,
an input/output ratio measured in monetary value for the main crops, a diversification index, and the value
of trade income per hectare. Results show that households in a1l samples have increased their use of inputs
in constant value. Input use efficiency changes are significantfor rice in the DAFEP sample and for soybean
in both samples. Diversification was high to begin with and did not change significantly. Comparison
between DAFEP and Reference sample shows that the project cannot be associated in a significant way
with an intensification process that could bear witness of a technological change. However, the magnitude
of changes that took place in input efficiency between DAFEP and Reference tested significant for rice. In
the DAFEP sample, households traded a larger amount ofproducts before and after the project compared to
the Reference sample but the impact of the project on trade income per hectare is not tested significant.

Extension. 1he cluster of qualitative extension indicators includes six ordinal indicators: availability of
agriculture information (AAI), willingness to pay for agriculture information (WPAY), accessibility of
extension workers (AEW), extension meeting frequency (EMF) and improvement in access to agricultural
informat-ion (IAA1) , and general access to extension services (GAES), a composite indicator. Results
indicate that households have better accessibility to agricultural information, but they don't show change in
the willingness to pay for agricultural information. Accessibility to extension workers increased significantly
in all samples. Improvement in the availability of agricultural information is rated as positive and non
Significant for the DAFEP respondents and positive and significant for the Reference sample

Links. The links refer to the relationships between farmers and the upstream and downstream agricultural
environment. The cluster included six ordinal variables: accessibility of input markets (AIM), accessibility
of agriculture input information (AAII) , joint purchase of agriculture input OPAI), accessibility of output
markets (AOM), joint marketing of agricultural outputs (JMAO), and improvement in upstream and
downstream links, a composite indicator (IUDI).

All households have significantly better accessibility (fewer barriers) to input market in general. However,
trends <i.re not significant for accessibility to input information, joint purchasing of inputs, access to
alternafve output markets, and joint marketing of agricultural commodities. Altogether, the composite
indicator shows a significant positive for all household samples. There is a Significant difference between
DAFEP and Reference ]PAI and ]MAO. For ]PAI, the Reference sample shows a significantly higher
positive change while the figure is reversed for ]MAO. For all other indicators, there is no significant
difference.

Empowerment. This cluster includes ordinal variables: participation in implementing development projects
(PIDP), desire to participate in decision making (DPDM), group meeting frequencies (GMF) and
interest in group activities (IGA); and nominal variables: participation in village joint activities (PVGA),
participation in village decision making (PVDM), knowledge on decision making process at a village
level




                                                                                                  Executive Summary    vii
- . - - . - . -..   -~~-
       AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA.    ~

       NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




       (KDMP) and benefits from joining group activities (BJGA). A composite single indicator reflects farmers'
       confidence to join decision making processes (CJDM).

       Participation in implementing development projects has significantly increased in all samples and the desire
       to be involved in decision making process has increased. The composite indicator shows a significant increase
       confidence to join decision making process. Nominal variables analysis shows increased participation to
       village decision making process. However, this trend is similar in all samples and cannot be linked to the
       project but likely to more global changes such as the ongoing decentralisation process.

       Correlation analysis. Decomposition of economic and welfare clusters and correlation analysis indicate
       that agribusiness activities are the main factor explaining the observed trend in agriculture-related income
       increase. Also, while in all samples the percentage of households with non farm income has drastically
       increased reaching 95%, the structure of non farm income remains stable. Remittances and other subsidies
       share increased and indicate that households become more dependent from external sources of income. In
       all samples the trend is that monetary non food routine expenses are progressively taking over monetary
       food expenses. This indicates a slight improvement in general welfare; however, as education expenses and
       asset acquisition remain stable, this improvement does not translate into an accumulation process or a
       long term strategy. Transfers from the households are limited and confirm that the net flow of transfer is
       positive towards the rural households.

       in.;titu

       At district level, the institutionalization of integrated extension services remains tenuous. Some districts,
       recognizing potential benefits from farmer-led approaches to extension using the DAFEP model, have
       supported integrated extension centers through guaranteed on-going finances and Bupati decree. In
       districts where decentralized, farmer-led extension is working well, and benefits accruing from application
       of DAFEP principles are recognized, there has been strong support from the head of the district (Bupati)
       and district parliaments in institutionalization ofBIPP's (e.g. Magelang district Central Java andMaros
       District in South Sulawesi). Where there was strong support for DAFEP, funding has also been provided
       for expansion ofDAFEP concepts to other districts (e.g. in Maros district Rp 800 m for expansion to an
       additional 20 villages during 2005). Elsewhere support is weaker and in some cases BIPPs have either
       been abolished (Banyumas, Kotabaru, Tanah Laut, Timor Tengah Selatan Districts), or their echelon level
       downgraded in effect restricting the career path and status of extension staff. In many cases BIPPs/KlPPs
       are seen simply as cost centers and their potential contribution to poverty alleviation is not recognized.

       District Extension Committees (DECs) were established by Bupati decree in the participating districts to
       provide district level policy support for farmer-led extension, facilitate flows ofinformation to meet farmer
       demands, assist in building linkages between farmer groups with NGOs, Universities and Industry. As
       such, the DEC was envisaged as potentially playing a pivotal role in achievement ofDAFEP objectives.
       While their objectives rely on committee members representing all influential sub-sectors (Government,
       NGO, Research Institutes, Farmers,Agro-business, etc.), most D ECs remained dominated by Government
       through an over-representation (usually 50 % or more) or perceived authority of Government members,
       and as yet have largely failed to realize their potential. DECs have not received information from BIPPI
       KlPPs on actual benefits accrued from implementation ofDAFEP at farmer level except for verbal reports
       and, where DEC is active (e.g. Magelang district), members have assessed impacts ofFMAs for themselves
       through farm visits. This information failure significantly reduced the effectiveness of DECs in fulfilling
       their roles such as establishing priorities for extension effort. Further external support and clearer definition
       of roles and responsibilities for both BIPPs and DECs is essential to consolidate progress so far.




VIII   Executive SJ'1lrnary
                                                         ~              AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                              NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




7he most significant changes occurred in the cluster of income and welfare indicators, DAFEP household
showing a significant improvement in their overall welfare situation compared to the Reference sample. With
respects to increasing households' income by 5% as targeted at the beginning ofthe project, there is evidence of
success {in constant terms}. The direct impact of DAFEP on technology and productivity indicators is very
limited. In particular there are no significant changes in the yield of rice and in net income from trade.

In relation to the qualitative indicators, the project seemed to have not very much affected the target group
as far as attitudes, skills and practices related to extension are concerned. \Vhile positive changes occurred
between the Benchmark and the EoP surveys, these cannot be considered as an impact of the project. In all
other clusters, the only significant changes occur on the households' practices related to join purchasing of
inputs and outputs, with the Reference performing "better" (more joint purchasing) in input purchase and
the DAFEP performing "better" (more joint purchasing) in output purchase. Even in these cases, changes
are significant between samples but not when compared with the Benchmark situation.

Farmers and NGOs however were enthusiastic about the DECs: NGOs because of the information forum
it provides to focus and refine their district programs and farmers because, often for the first time, they have
direct access to decision~makers. On the other hand, DEC meetings have often dealt with inconsequential
issues and failed to engage decision-makers who are often represented by staff members with no end-of
line authority. There are examples of how DECs have facilitated engagement of research institutions in
partnerships with farmers to solve issue-specific topics however, it will take time before these committees
mature and begin to tackle long-term, industry-wide or whole farming systems approaches to improving
productivity. Partnerships with industry initiated through DECs have also begun to show benefit. For
example, farmers have been able to negotiate a direct marketing agreement for rice produced throughout the
Gowa district whereby they now receive 20% more for their product. But overall, institutional development
impact hilS been modest at best.

Condulin.; R..                              Issues

The empirical evidence substantiates the structural shift underway in Indonesian agriculture from low
value to high value crop and livestock activities. Diversifiedfarming will be the solution for farmers whose
scale of operations or land quality does not enable them to support a family from rice farming income.
Diversification means switching to higher-valued crops, livestock and fish production in response to new
types of consumer demand. Small farmers will need technical assistance from either the public or private
sector if they are to respond successfully to these new market opportunities. Agricultural extension faces
a major challenge in Indonesia, similar to public sector extension systems in many countries, to develop
an effec:ive institutional mechanism for disseminating technology relevant for small-scale producers.
Nationa:, development priorities include improving extension, and acknowledge that new approaches will
be required in the context of the changed institutional context of decentralized extension service delivery.
There is growing evidence of significant benefits to decentralized extension systems which partner the
public sector capacities with the private sector and civil society. Passage of the new law on extension for
agriculture fisheries and forestry (Law 16/2006) now explicitly recognizes private sector provision and
support~, a multi-provider system. Local governments need to be assisted to take up applicable models as
a part of: 0) moving from top-down to participatory approaches to extension subject matter prioritization
and delivery; (ii) shifting the balance from input and technology dissemination to dissemination of market
and upstream information and technology; and (iii) moving from centrally-managed extension services to
decentralized services, and increase space for private delivery of extension services.




                                                                                                   Executive Summary    IX
    AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:   ../
    NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




    The stagnant level of rice yields points to the needfor research on how to increase yields without increasing
    costs i.e., how to improve rice profitability- in the interests of both farmers incomes and stability of
    food prices. Nevertheless the fact that rice based indicators were not significantly different in DAFEP
    and reference groups is not surprising since the choice of enterprises for focus by farmers was open and
    incentives for rice have been poor.

    Private extension services will assume greater importance in the dry-land cash cropping sub-sector in
    eastern Indonesia. This is because exportable commodity production is being increasingly supported by the
    private sector. However, the government will continue to have an important role in coordination, quality
    assurance, oversight, training, and provision ofinformation services. The evolution from a publicly-financed
    and publicly-delivered service to one that is publicly-financed but privately delivered has begun. Although
    the long-term goal is privately-financed and privately-delivered services, there will continue to be a role
    for government in providing a basic minimum extension service to serve the needs of poor farmers. The
    present policy stance in Indonesia is also providing a more supportive environment for a range of rural
    producer organizations. In all these initiatives, it is important that measures are put in place to better link
    agricultural research and extension; the separation of these functions with the organization of the MOA
    has made it difficult to focus on farmers' problems when setting the research agenda, while at the same time
    achieving effective dissemination of research results.

    Strengthening information systems will support higher rural productivity. DAFEP was predicated on the
    idea that lack of information was a binding constraint in farm incomes. 'The data on diversification and
    decline in rice areas shows that other factors were probably at least as important for example agricultural
    prices, which would have been declining for rice during the implementation period. Secondly, the
    constraint of credit to apply any new ideas, particularly in Eastern Indonesia but also elsewhere owing to
    various access constraints in the banking system was a critical factor - the FI\rlA grants did not increase
    access to implementation credit.

    The low capacity of rural information and communication technologies (lCT) development is widely
    acknowledged to be a barrier to increasing rural incomes and productivity. Rural communities need up
    to-date information on sources, availability and costs of inputs for production, and also on the potential
    of different techniques and technologies used for production, processing and marketing. The information
    that is often most relevant to improving livelihoods is non-technical, including the role and responsibilities
    of different institutions in the provision of key services, such as agricultural extension, credit, health and
    education, and where to go and who to ask for more specific information. ICT offers an opportunity to
    make rapid progress. It is important that information is available in an appropriate format and language,
    and that rural communities have the capacity to access, analyze and act on it. With decentralization and
    the new political and institutional environment in Indonesia, there is an opportunity to use leT to support
    the agricultural development agenda and to improve the delivery of agricultural services in innovative
    ways.




x   Executive SUrlrnary
                                    Introduction
1.1  Agriculture averages half of rural households incomes, with the rest coming from rural non
     agricultural activities, petty trading and seasonal construction work. There are important regional
     variations between Java and off-Java. Despite this regional diversity and agriculture's secular
     decline as part of Indonesia's structural transformation, the sector remains the core for rural
     household incomes. The sector 1 employs the largest share, 45 percent, of Indonesia's labor and
     contributes the second largest share, 17.5 percent, of GDP. Agricultural sector productivity growth
     (along with price changes) has remained the most important way out of poverty.2

1.2.  Between 1968 and 1992, Indonesia sustained rapid growth in both crop and animal production,
      with annual output growth averaging nearly 4 percent. "Green revolution" technologies brought
      large increases in rice yields, and the area under non-food crops grew rapidly outside of Java.
      However, growth began to slow during the end of this period, and by the 19908 appeared to have
      stagnated. But Indonesia's agricultural productivity growth has slowed and is low both historically
      for the country and compared with others. Agriculture total factor productivity growth fell from
      an'lUal gains of2.5 percent over 1968-92 to annual contractions of 0.1 percent from 1993 to 2000
      (Fuglie, 2004). (See Table 1.1, Figure 1.1). Part of the slowdown was a natural result of slowing
      growth in demand for food products by Indonesian consumers, as population growth slowed and
      ad·.;qua..:y of food energy intake was achieved. But a major cause of the agricultural slowdown has
      be,~n the relative decline in public and private investments in the agricultural sector. Both
      government spending and private investment in agriculture in Indonesia fell in the 19905 as a
      percentage of agricultural GDP.


I   Agriculture is defined here to encompass forestry and fisheries, consistent with GOI statistical conventions.
    McCulh'h, Nea,Julian VVeisbrod and Peter Timmer (2006). "The Pathways out of Poverty in Rural Indonesia         an empirical assessment."




                                                                                                                                    Introduction   1
    AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA.                            ....,)
    NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




    Figure 1.1 GDP and Agriculture
    (Rp. billion, 1993 base GDP)
     Rp. Billion
    500

    450

    400
    J501
             i
                                              overallGDP
    300

    250

    200
    150
                                           Agri<:ulturc
    100

        50


             19901991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 20022003

    Source: BPS, World Bank staffcalculation




    Table 1.1. Level and composition ofagricultural output in Indonesia
                                                                              Average annual growth rate during period            !


    I                                                                    1961-67                1968-92               1993-2000
      Crop and animal outputs, total                                         1.2                  4.8                    1.0
      Food crops, all                                                        1.3                  5.1                   -0.1
      Risse, paddy                                                           1.7                  5.5                    0.7
      Cassava                                                               -0.5                  1.9                    0.2
      Maize                                                  I              11.3                  7.8                    1.6
      Horticultural crops, all                               !               2.7                  3.3                    3.9
      Fruits, all                                                            3.0                  3.7                    4.3
      Vegetables, all                                                       2.9                   4.0                    3.9
      Non-food crops, all                                                    0.8                  5.3                    2.9
                                                                                                                                  I
      Cane sugar                                                             1.4                  5.6                   -4.1
    ·Rubber                                                  I              0.4                   2.8                    0.8
    IAnimal products, all                                                    1.4                  5.7                    0.9
    ·Meat                                                                    1.5                  6.0                    0.8
    iMilk                                                                   -0.6        I         5.1                    2.9
    ·Fish products, all                                                      4.6                  4.4                    4.3
      Forest products, all                                                  -1.5                  0.7                   -3.5
      TOTAL FACTOR                                                             -                   -
    I PRODUCTIVITY                                                           0.7                  2.6                   -0.1
     Source: Fug/ie and Piggott (2003) cited in ADBIIFPR12004.

    1.3.  There are several reasons for this. First, investment in irrigation stalled with the crisis, with the
          result that much of the current irrigation infrastructure is in poor condition. Second" the technical
          options for improving agriculture have become more specific to smaller agro-ecological areas with
          less widespread benefits than earlier Green Revolution technologies. Finally, agricultural extension
          services have suffered a serious decline and serve fewer farmers, particularly since decentralization.

    1.4.  The Green Revolution policies that favored monoculture agriculture and excessive use of water and
          fertilizer have caused a decline in the quality of the land resources, water resources, and living
          environment over the last three decades (IFPRI/ADB 2004). The decline of the quality of
          agricultural land has contributed to declining land productivity growth that, along with the trend
          of lowering real commodity prices, has tended to slow growth in farm incomes. Rapid political



2   Introduction
                                                      ~             AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                           NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




      change has resulted in a declining role for the central government and increasing responsibilities
      for regional and local governments. The role of the central government is evolving toward primarily
     facilitating and servicing.

1.5.  Context and objectives of the report: Indonesian agriculture is at a crossroads. Supporting the
      livelihood of millions of Indonesians, it needs to underpin renewed and robust growth of the
      economy; and be a key component of the Government's poverty alleviation strategy. The challenge
      for the future is to reinvigorate productivity gains among rural producers, and provide the
      foundation for long run sustainability of these productivity gains. Productivity gains are key to
      farmer income grovvth, and for this rebuilding the research and extension systems - that have seen
      a marked deterioration in recent years - will be critical.

1.6  The experience of the Indonesian decentralization of its extension system has been mixed, with
     adverse impact on extension through sharp reductions in funding, and removal of central-level
     guidance. At the same time, a series of positive debates and experimentation in management have
     taken place from a shift on top-down to participatory approaches, input and technology
     dissemination to dissemination of market and upstream information and technology, from centrally
     managed extension services to decentralized services, and some movement toward privatization of
     extension.

1.6  One such experimental approach was the World Bank-assisted DAFEP (Decentralized Agriculture
     and Forestry Extension Project        2000-2005) which provided an impetus for demand-driven
     extension and for institutional reforms at the local government level. The Bank will also embark
     on a major agricultural services project         the Farmer Empowerment through Agricultural
     Technology and Information (FEATI) - starting mid-2007. FEATI draws on many of the
     elements piloted under DAFEP and will support the implementation of the new Extension Law
     that was passed in late-2006. In this context, an assessment of the agricultural extension services,
     as seen through the lens of the impact evaluation of the DAFEP project, was deemed to be timely
     and relevant. This report thus has the following objectives:

     (iii) provide an overview of the institutional changes in agricultural extension in Indonesia;
     (iv) present the results of the impact evaluation ofDAFEPj and
     (iii) discuss lessons learned and emerging issues in the new political and institutional context.

1.7. The report is structured as follows. This introductory chapter is followed by a brief history of
     agricultural extension services in Indonesia. Chapter III presents the salient features of DAFEP,
     the methodology used for the impact assessment, and descriptive statistics. Chapter IV presents
     the: detailed results of the analysis for the quantitative and qualitative indicators. Chapter V
     presents an assessment of the Farmer-Managed Activities and the district-level institutional
     reforms. The concluding chapter presents the lessons learned and emerging policy issues.




                                                                                                      Introduction   3
                                                                      \...               AGRICULTURAL EXTENS!ON SERVICES IN INDONESIA
                                                                             NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES
                                                                                                                                                   -




        Agricultural Extension in
      Indonesia- A BriefHistorf

2.1  Agricultural development was a priority for the early Indonesian governments especially the
     increase in the production of food commodities like rice. From 1948 to 1950, the government's
     Ka~imo Plan (Rencana Kasimo) involved the extension workers in overall village development,
     and developing livestock, perennial crops, fisheries, crafts, and small industries. The Kasimo Plan
     was followed by the Special Welfare Plan (Rencana KeseJahteraan Istimewa-RKi), and later under
     the "Guided Democracy" period of the early 1960s, the rice self-sufficiency movement (Gerakan
     SWtuembada Beras), and was conducted nationwide through mass campaign. In practice, all these
     programs failed due to an excessive reliance on command and control methods.

2.2  The failure of the earlier programs created a new thinking to return the agricultural extension
     activities to their original basic principles, such as promoting voluntary participation, farmers'
     independence, and democratic norms. This culminated in the launch during the 1965/1966 planting
     ses~ion, of the Mass Guidance (Bimas - Bimbingan Massa!) program in five provinces. The BIMAS
     approach consisted of a package of programs to support production, consisting of provision of
     credit (throllgh Bank Rakyat Indonesia, BRI, a large state-owned bank, operating in rural areas),
     fanner extension services (by the field agricultural extension workers or PPL - Penyuluh Pertanian
     Laianglln) , and the Local Office IAgency of Agriculture           Dinas Pertanian), affordable and
     subsidized agricultural inputs-production tools (supplied by distributors, small shops, and village
     cooperative.,) and the processing and marketing of agricultural products (managed by village
     cooperatives, farmers' groups, and private firms). The Bimas program relied on the training and visit
     method (T&V) method that was heavily favored by the Bank4 and other donors from the mid-70s
     90s and was eventually supplanted in the late-1990s with the onset of decentralization (detailed below).
3 This chapter draws from SMERC (2004). 

4 See Anderson, Feder lLnd Ganguly (2006) for an excellent overview of the evolution and eventual abandonment of the T&V approach in Asia 

and Africa. 





                                                                                                                                              5

        AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESiA.               .,,/
        NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES
·




        2.3  The institutional arrangements for agricultural extension have undergone myriad changes and
             several policy reversals in the last three decades. This has, in no small measure, contributed to the
             deterioration in management, professionalism, mobility, and administration of the agricultural
             extension system. In 1972, the government established the Agency of Education and Agricultural
             Training (BPPLP -Badan Pembinaan Pendidikan dan Pelatihan Pertanian) that was targeted to
             develop centralized education plans for the agricultural sector. When its name was changed to the
             BPLPP (Badan Pendidikan, Latihan, dan Penyuluhan Pertanian) or the Agency of Agricultural
             Education, Training, and Extension), all of the duties, authorities, and responsibilities for
             education, training, and extension in the agriculture sector in the regions were shifted from every
             Directorate General (DG) of the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) to the BPLPP. However, while
             all agricultural extension activities nationwide were supposedly conducted by the Center of
             Agricultural Extension under the BPLPP, technically every DG of MoA still continued agricultural
             extension activities. This overlap resulted in the Presidential Decree No. 62/1983, which
             transferred the management of agricultural extension to the Bimas Control Agency (BP Bimas)5.
             Thus, the extension authority of the Directorate Generals in the Ministry of Agriculture was
             transferred to BP Bimas.

        2.4  This centralization of extension management was later deemed to be inefficient and through a Joint
             Decree of the Ministry of Home Affairs (MoHA) and MoA No. 65/1991, the government
             returned the responsibility of managing agricultural extension activities to each of the Directorate
             Generals in the MoA. This reversal of policy after eight years resulted in the agricultural extension
             workers moving from a polyvalent {multi crops)-orientation to their old functions as sub-sector
             extension workers. Along with this new policy, the government also created the National
             Committee of Agricultural Extension (KPPN- Komisi Penyuluh Pertanian Nasional) at the national
             level and the Communication Forum for Agricultural Extension Workers (FKPP-Forum
             Komunikasi Penyuluh Pertanian) in the provincial and district level. In 1993, this was changed
             again, through Presidential Decree No. 83/1993, where the coordination of agricultural extension
             activities was moved to the Center of Agricultural Extension, under the Secretary-General of the
             Ministry of Agriculture. Extension activities that were in the past done by each Directorate
             Generals were shifted to the Center of Agricultural Extension.

        2.5  In 1996 the Ministry of Agriculture modified the structure of extension institutions by forming
             BIPP (Balai Informasi dan Penyuluhan Pertanian or District Agricultural Information and
             Extension Service) in every district. This action was based on the consideration that farmers require
             a more comprehensive agricultural extension, the one that is more people and system-oriented
             rather than commodity-oriented. All agricultural extension activities at the district level was
             transferred from each Dinas to BIPP. In this new structure, PPL (field agriculture extension
             workers) were transferred back to RECs and formed a PPL Team, and the RECs building assets
             were also transferred from Dinas to BIPP. The main duties of this institution were to manage
             extension system and to integrate extension programs from the four Dinas into one system. The
             budget for BIPP and RECs activities, included salaries and operational costs for extension, funded
             by the central government through regional subsidies, and through a special assistance fund for the
             agricultural extension. However, this move elicited opposition from the local Dinas, especially
             the Dinas Foodcrops who feared losing their identity in the new BIPP. Other complications
             followed including objections from the State Ministry of Administrative Reform Apparatus (or

        5 To organize the implementation of the Bimas program, in 1969 (through Presidential Decree No. 95/1969), the government established the
        Rimas Control Agency (BP Bimas), an organization outside the Ministry of Agriculture, headed by the Minister of Agriculture.




    6   .Agricultural Extension in indonesia· .A Brief H's:ory
                                                                            "-                   AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                                                    NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES
                                                                                                                                                            ·



        Menpan) in 1997 stating that the formation of BIPP as Local Unit Implementers (Unit Pelaksana
        Daerah) was not in line with government policy and that it could only be "a non structural task
        force" to integrate field agriculture extension workers. The common woes of agricultural extension
        workers world-wide - relatively poor incomes, poor incentives, and poor facilities, lack of
        opportunities to up-grade their skills and education - were exacerbated in the Indonesian context
        by the unusually high number of changes in the policy, institutional, and organizational
        arrangements.

Impact of Decentralization

2.6  The fall of the Suharto regime in 1998 and the passage of Law No 22, 1999 on Local Government
     resulted in one of the most ambitious decentralization programs in the world. Indonesia's ongoing
     decentralization process since 2001 has resulted in financial resources, personnel and
     responsibilities for delivery of basic services being devolved to an ever growing number of more
     than 400 district governments. The lift of the ban to free press in 1998 and later, with the revision
     of the decentralization law in 2004, the direct election of regional heads, have created a more open
     political environment. These changes have presented both challenges and opportunities for
     improvement in local governance. The challenges are amplified as they are not only related to
     institutional or technical issues but also political. Projects requiring construction or purchase of
     goods are favored for obvious rent-seeking opportunities and poverty programs get short shrift.
     Ov,:,rall, the environment for "good governance" at the local level is weak and corruption similar to
     the national situation is endemic. Systemic capaciry issues affecting the districts include:
     weaknesses in public policy, exclusionary budget planning and management practices; poor
     standards of service delivery and accountability to end users; weak financial management,
     procurement and internal controls; limited local resource mobilization capacity, and barriers to
     improving the local investment climate.

2.7  With decentralization beginning in 2001, including for extension, local governments had increased
     authority to chose the organization for their services. While about a hundred chose to retain the
     newly-introduced, unified extension structure, the other two thirds reverted to a fragmented
     structure and some eliminated BIPPs and set up new extension institutions. Studies like Hadi
     (2003), Indonesia Rapid Decentralization Apraisal (IRDA) and SMERU (2002) have shown that
     decentralization has brought about a deterioration in the delivery of public services like health,
     education, and infrastructure (road and irrigation).6 Poor governance, despite increased district
     income as a result of central government grants, has undermined the structure of the extension
     system built up over 20 years. Management, professionalism, mobility, and administration of the
     agricultural extension system, as well as respect among farmers, have almost disappeared in many
     districts. Of the total field extension workers (PPLs), there are only 2,559PPLs (6.38%) who hold
     bachelor degrees, while the rest (37,450 PPLs) hold sarjana muda (associate degrees) or lower
     qualifications, mainly training from agricultural high schools.

2.8  Neglect of many aspects of the public service including agricultural extension is due in part to
     the lack of accountability oflocal government to electors. Regional autonomy has changed not only
     the relationship among levels of government (central-province-districtlcity) but also the format of
     the accountability of local government. The responsibilities of local governments, in relation to
     agricultural extension, are detailed in the Ministry of Home Affairs Decree No. 130-67/2002

6 A recent VVorId Bank study, "Making Services Work for the Poor in Indonesia" (2006) however states that some human development outcomes
have actua!;y improved and that the reality is more nuanced. However, low efficiency of public spending, low quality of services, and inequalities in
access and 'lUtcomes are still persistent problems.




                                                                                                                      In InGUfieSla   fl Btlef          7
    AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA.            ..,)
    NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES



            which explains the nine functions onocal government in supporting extension services. The Decree has
            been largely ignored by local government in favor of a focus on infrastructure rather than human
            resource development projects. Regulations on the accountability o flo cal parliament to the public and
            the executive to the public are largely neglected. Regional autonomy as practiced does not enable the
            public to supervise both executive and legislature's accountability. As a result, local government can
            be run simply based on agreements between the executive and thelegislature, without paying any serious
            atten tion to ei therpublic aspirations ortoMinisterialDecrees from the central govern men t.The multitude
            ofinstitutionalarrangementsandinconsistentpolicieshavecreateddoubtanduncertaintyintheextension
            service. The situation is aggravated by their inability to gain the trust offarmers through consistent under
            funding by the districts since decentralization. An example of under-funding of extension
            from Java is given below.

    Table 2.1. The allocation of operational expenditures of agricultural extension in (in rupiah) in the
    district of Cianjur (WestJava)

                           Description                         Prior to Decentralization     After Decentralization   I

         Fuel and exploitation fund                            RpAO,OOO/month              None                       I
         Ftxed field allowance (U]T)                           Rp.90,OOO-110,OOO           Rp.5S,OOO/mt'lllth         I

         Lodging fund                                          Rp.600,OOO/year             None
         Stationery for instructor                             Rp.150,OOO/year             Rp.sO,OOO/year
         Demonstration funds                                   Rp.5 million/year           None
         Operational funds                                     Rp.S million/year           Rp.500.000/year
         Stationery                                            Rp.200,OOO/year             Rp.l00,OOO/year
      Source: SMERU (2004)



    Recent Developments

    2.9  The current President ofIndonesia, Susilo Bambang Yuhhoyono, has taken a strong leadership role
         in developing an agenda for the revitalization of the agriculture, fisheries, and forestry sector
         (Revitalisasi Pertanian Perikanan dan KehutananlRPPK) that was formally presented in June 2005.
         The RPPK is a general strategy aimed at improving the welfare of farmers, fishermen and forest
         communities, and increasing the competitiveness and maintaining the sustain ability of agricultural,
         fisheries and forestry products. This general strategy also forms the main part of the National
         Agenda for Community Welfare Improvement (Agenda Nasional Peningkatan Kestjahteraan
         Masyarakat).

    2.10 The RPPK focuses on, inter alia, the development of human resource capacity and participatory
         empowerment of farmers through improved information systems, training in community
         agribusiness development, increasing funding for long-term technological research and
         development to improve agricultural competitiveness. This is also reflected in the Government
         ofIndonesia (GOl) Medium Term Plan, 2005-2009 (RPJM) which recognizes the importance of
         diversification to improving efficiency and farmer welfare and the growing importance of
         globalization in agricultural competitiveness. The RPJM calls for revitalizing agriculture through
         the development of agribusiness linkages to improve farmers' incomes and for greater
         diversification to reach an ambitious sectoral growth rate of 3.9 percent.

    2.11  The systems that the central government is now aiming for include an increased reliance on farmer!
          producer organizations, decentralization of authority and budget responsibility a greater role for




8   Agrlculturai Extens'on In IndOf'esla   A Brie! History
                                                          ",&...._ - - - - - - - - - - 


                                                         "-.            AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                               NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES
                                                                                                                            -
       non-governmental provision (universities, agribusinesses, NGOs, farmer organizations (FOs), and
       other private sector providers) of agricultural services who have been active in many areas but
       which have remained at the periphery of driving the government's agenda on agricultural
       modernization due to lack of a conducive policy environment. The transfer of new agricultural
       technologies to farmers by private plantations, seed companies, agricultural chemical companies,
       animal production firms and food processing companies continues to rise. In November 2006, the
       Government promulgated a new Extension Law? (Lax No. 16/2006) that is aimed at revamping
       the extension services with increased coordination between the district, provincial and central
       levels, establishment of clear norms and standards for agricultural extension institutions at all levels
       of government, and most significantly, a recognition of the importance of a multi-provider
       extension system .

Role of tbe \'Vorld Bank

2.12 The World Bank (WB) has had a long-standing relationship with the Government of Indonesia
     (GOI) with regard to its financing of agricultural technical services. The Bank supported GOI in
     the development of its agricultural research services since 1975 and its extension services since
     the late 1960s. In addition to, and complementary to the extension projects, the Bank also
     supported agricultural education and training in a series of training and capacity building projects
     to support GOl's long-term strategy of improving and expanding pre-service and in-service
     agriculture sector training. The \:VB has also financed smallholder cattle development, tree crop
     development, and more recently research management and integrated pest management projects
     (See Table2.2).

 Table 2.2 World Bank-assisted Technical Services Projects in Indonesia
                               Name ofProject                       Closing Year          LoanAmt. (SUSm)
Second Agricultural Research Management Project                         2002                       $19.0
Treecrops Smallholder Development Project                               2000                       $76.9
Integrated Pest .Management Training Project                            1999                       $25.2
Agricultural Research Management Project                                1996                       $35.3
Third Agricultural Extension Project                                    1993                       $55.0
Smallholder Cattle Development Project                                  1993                       $32.0
Third Agricultural Training Project                                     1992                       $63.3
National Agricultural Research II Project                               1990                       $62.9
Decentralized Agric. and Forestry Extension Project                     2005                       $18.0

The centralized extension system, preferred under the T&V method supported by the Bank lasted from
the 1970s to the early 90s during the period of implementation of the series of agricultural extension
projects.

A Paradign: SHft

2.13  Despite over 30,000 public extension agents, Indonesia's national system was not reaching farmers,
      leading to roll-out of a basic reform that received World Bank support for piloting innovations
      beginning 1999 through the Decentralized Agricultural and Forestry Extension Project. Instead of
      five separate, commodity-defined, technical services, these would be combined in unified, District-


  Covering agriculture, fisheries, and forestry.




                                                                                                                        9
      AGRICULTURAI_ EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA.          ",)
      NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES



              level, extension agencies. Moreover, these agencies would take a farming-systems approach to
              meeting farmers' extension needs. Initially, 20 of the country's 400+ Districts would pilot the new
              approach. The project development objective was to assist the Government ofIndonesia in enhancing
              farmers' capacity to participate in and lead extension activities and in strengthening the capacity
              of the district-level integrated agricultural and forestry extension system which would promote
              economically feasible, environmentally sustainable, and socially acceptable farming practices and
              increase farmers' incomes.

      2.14 The project objective was consistent with the Government's policy thrust towards increased
           decentralization, increased effectiveness of public services, encouraging self-reliance among rural
           communities and withdrawal of its support where it is not needed or where it can be provided
           by private sectors and others. Drawing on experiences of earlier pilot projects in Indonesia it was
           recognized that effectiveness of extension could be achieved through: (i) putting the farmer first, (ii)
           reorganizing public extension where district extension services of agriculture, forestry and fisheries
           are integrated, and (iii) involving NGOs and lead farmers as part of the extension effort.

      2.15 The following chapters examine the impact of the DAFEP approach in greater detail.




10    AgricUltural Extension in IndoPesI3   A Brief Hlsto'y
                     The Decentralized
               Agricultural and Forestry
                     Extension Project8

3.1  The DAFEP project was implemented in 16 districts in 9 provinces between February 2000-March
     2005. The total cost of the project was US$ 23.57 M, of which US$ 18 M comprised the World
     Bank loan. It was structured into 3 components to test and implement extension reforms at farmer,
     diSTrict and central levels:

       (i)  Enhancement of farmers' capacity to participate and to lead extension activities (US$ 7.89
            million, 34% of total costs) to support (a) revitalization of farmer groups and organizations of
            farmers' networks; (b) building farmer capacity to participate in and to lead extension activities;
            and (c) promotion of participatory extension methods and provision of media and technical
            support.

       (ii) Strengthening the district extension system (US$ 11.16 million, 47% of total costs) to support
            (a) the introduction of institutional and management reforms at district level; (b) building the
            capacity of extension staff in the participating districts; and (c) strengthening the extension
            support and delivery systems in participating districts.

     (iE) Provision of central extension policy and project management support (US$ 4.42 million,
          19% of total costs) to support (a) the improvement of extension policy and special studies; (b)
          strengthening the central extension support systems; and (c) provision oftechnical assistance and
          project management support.
3.2  The project started in 2000 and was completed in 2005. The Centre for International Cooperation
     in Agricultural Research for Development (ClRAD), based in France, was contracted to ensure a

8This section draws from the DAFEP Project Appraisal Document (Report No19421-IND), 1999 and the DAFEP Implementation Completion
Report (ICR), Report No, 33582, November 2005,




                                                                       The Decentral,zeo Agricultural and Forestry Extension Project   11
      AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:                   ,,)
      NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES



              comprehensive assessment of this project. CIRAD proposed an impact analysis methodology that
              was accepted by DAFEP Project Management Unit (PMU) and the VVorld Bank. This methodology
              was a two-step process consisting in a "Benchmark" survey and an "End of Project" (EoP) survey for
              collection of data related to a set of indicators corresponding to the project expected outputs. 9 See
              Annex 2 for a description of the methodology and the indicators.

      3.3  The rationale for establishing a two-step survey entrenched in the need to perform a reliable
           evaluation. For this reason, the applied methodology included three samples of 480 farmers each,
           respectively called "Da£ep", "Reference" and "Spillover". These samples were designed so that they
           made possible a "before-and-after" and "with-and-without" analysis resulting in a more accurate
           evaluation of the real project impact. A set of39 indicators, consistent with DAFEP logical framework
           as indicated above, was elaborated for measuring the multi-dimensional impacts of the project on
           the targeted farm household population. The benchmark survey was completed in October 2000 and
           the EOP survey in August 2006.

      3.4  Sampling Methodology




      3.5  The choice of the appropriate sampling size was based on the decision to use income dispersion as
           the key variable whose variance was used for setting the sample size so that it is representative of the
           project population. With 30,000 households directly targeted by the project, and a 95% confidence,
           gave rise to a sample size of 370 randomly selected farmers. Due to possible "losses" throughout the
           project duration, the sample was increased to 450. The field selection of villages was based on the
           identification of districts and related sub-districts where DAFEP was planned to be implemented,
           and to select sub-districts that were the most representative of the district agro-ecological and
           socioeconomic conditions.

      lbe R~lert'l1(e sample

      3.7  For the purpose of the "with and without" comparison, a Reference household sample of similar
           size and characteristics was selected with the same method in non-DAFEP districts. The process
           for selecting these households mirrored the process used for selecting DAFEP households. The
           main difference was that the choice of districts, sub-districts and villages was conditioned by their
           similarities to the districts, sub-districts and villages in the DAFEP sample.

      7be Spillo'1}er sample

      3.8  In addition, a Spillover sample was also selected in order to estimate whether the project also
           generated indirect effects in the areas of implementation. The Spillover sample was built as a mix of
           households not participating in DAFEP activities but located in areas where extension workers had
           been trained to, and expected to apply, the DAFEP approach. This sample included three different
           situations of non DAFEP households according to where they were located: a) in DAFEP villages,
           b) in non DAFEP villages but still in DAFEP sub-districts, and c) in non DAFEP sub-districts but
           still in DAFEP districts. (for more details on smapting methodology, see Annex 1)


      9 Refer in partic-ular to the project logical framework as stated in Annex 1 (pp 1-5) of DAFEP Project Implementation Plan   Annexes -. July
      1999, National Centre for Agricultural Extension. Ministry of Agriculture,




12    "he Decentral,zed AgncJitura: and Focesuy Extenslo:', PrOlect
                                                        ~                 AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                              NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




3.9  Since the main point of the analysis was to assess whether DAFEP had an impact, the key
     indicator in fact was the significance of a difference observed between the DAFEP and the Reference
     sample, difference being expressed for each indicator as the variation between the changes that
     occurred in the DAFEP sample and the changes that occurred in the Reference sample. Statistical
     treatment of data thus differed according to the type of indicator and whether the samples were
     considered as independent (for comparison of means and averages and dispersion, and for BefOre and
     After comparison) or as dependent (for comparison of individual longitudinal data and for regression
     analysis). The process of analysis included two steps. The first step consisted in conducting statistical
     work on each indicator in order to assess the impact of the project. The second step consisted in
     multivariate analyses such as principal component and factorial analysis, applied to these indicators
     in order to provide, whenever possible, a more complete understanding of how this impact took
     place and to what extend it was due to the project.

3.10 A T-test was used (with adjustment to the error degree of freedom using Satterthwaite's formula)
     within each sample to assess whether the situation After was significantly different from the situation
     Brjore. Then, a Binary Logistic Regression Model (logit) was applied to test the significance of the
     means' difference between DAFEP and Reference. For each model, the dependent variable was the
     membership of the respondent household to the different samples and the independent variable was
     the indicator. (For further details on the data analysis, see Annex 1).


DcscriptiVt~   Sample

3.11 The first section of this assessment presents a general description of the samples' main features, to
     give the reader a better understanding of the general situation of the respondent households. As
     indicated earlier, the indicators are regrouped in six clusters (quantitative and qualitiative) so as
     to provide a more structured and legible reporting. The quantitative variables are continuous and
     numerical while the qualitative indicators are discrete and distributive ..

3.12  In all cases, in each cluster, data analysis starts with presentation of the results for the Before and
     After situation along with the results of the significance test. These are discussed and then, the results
      from the cross sample analysis (DAFEP vs. Reference test) are presented and discussed. This latter
      part of the analysis is the main output of this research work. While the Before/After comparison is a
      necessary step in the process, it is only mainly presented because it proVides the material (the values
      of the cUfference between the BefOre and After situations for each sample) for the significance test of
      DAFEP impact. Absolute values are thus less important than relative changes.

3.13 An ove.rview of the samples

Profile ofre.,p01ldents

3.14 Age. The average age of respondents in the Benchmark survey is 43 and 48 in the EoP.
     This indicates a real consistency in the data collection process, in particular with respect of re
     interviewing the same households after five years.




                                                              The Dece~tralized Agricultural and Forestry Extension Project   13
                                                                                                                                             . I

     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES 

                                                                             J

     Figure 3.1 Age distribution of households' heads.


                                                                                   Survey
                                                                     1                                     2
                                 ,... ,;OJ
                                c:



                                I~
                                <>
                                      :'0
                                      40

                                                  A
                                            ...J._........WWW.LIWJ.I.u.u..LU.E_ __ 





                                f~l Jil                                                 

                                                                                                                                        -I
                                                                                                                                        ~
                                                                                                                                  N
                                                                                                                                        ·
                                                                                                                                        ..



                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                        ~
                                     ·:;0

                                ..
                                ,... :-.0
                                ;40
                                tr;'l()                                                                                           ...
                                ~ ~o
                                ·    '0

                                       o~      __~WW~WJ.I~UD~__~
                                              o   20 40 ';0 80 100                             20    40         'iO   80    100
                                                               Age                                        Age


                             Notes: For x (survey) l=Benchmark;           2~EoP    Survey; For y (type sample) l=DAFE;     2~Spillover;
                             3=Reference



     3.15 Education and Family Size. More than 60% of the respondents have an educational level equal or
     below the end of Elementary School. This proportion is similar and unchanged in the Before and After
     surveys and across the DAFEP, Reference and Spillover samples. The structure of education distribution
     shows no particular differences between samples. The average size of family members remained almost
     unchanged (4,68 before and 4,65 after).




14   The Decentralized Agr:ccltural and "ores try Ex~enslOn Project
       - - - - - - - - - - ..                     -.~.-          - - . - - . - -..- - 
                                                                ..
                                                                    ~                  AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                                          NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




Figure 3. 4. Distribution of family size in the Benchmark survey.

                                                                 Survey
                                               1                                       2
                        200
                   >
                   ~    1:.0
                   C
                   ·
                   ij.loo                                                                                 Col

                   · r.o
                   ...
                  I&-

                          0

                        200 





                                                                    Ii
                   >
                   ~    150
                   C
                   ·
                   ij.loo
                   ·
                   ... ,,0
                  I&-

                          0
                        ~oo

                   >




                                                                    11
                   ~    150
                   C
                   ·
                   ij.loo                                                                                 ...
                   · r.o
                   ...
                  I&-

                          0                                                        I       i    i
                                0                                     o    H)     ~        30   40

                                        Household                               Household

                Notes: For xCsurvey) l=Benchmark; 2:EoP Survey; For y (type sample) l=DAFE ; 2:Spillover ;
                3=Reference



3.16 Agricultural workers. The structure of the distribution of male workers in agriculture is similar in the
three sa:nples in the Benchmark survey and similar also in the EoP survey. Most of the households (more
than 60!1o) have two people working in agriculture. Changes in the Before/Mter situation are relatively
small, with the exception of an increasing number of households with no workers in agriculture (from 1 to
10 %). lhis either indicates an increase in the income level that makes labouring as wageworker less needed
or because other job opportunities have appeared.




                                                                          The Decentralized Agricu'tLral and Forestry Extension Project   15
                ---_ _ -        ...   .... _ - - ....   _ - - - - - - - - - .... _ - _ ...
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES
                                                                     ..J

     Figure 3.5. Evolution of male agricultural labour force (number of households members)




                                                                           DAFEP
                                                                                 100
                                                                                   Spillover   Reference


         300




                             Before                                                        After
     The structure of distribution of female agricultural workers has also evolved similarly across the three
     samples. The relative share of households with 0, 1 or 2 female agriculture workers, were respectively 17%,
     56%, 18% in the Benchmark and 28%,54%, and 10% in the EoP survey.


     Figure 3.6. Evolution of Female agricultural labour force (number of households members)



                                                                           300




                                                                                                           7




        DAFEP
               I                  o
                             Spillover
                                                       o

                                                   Reference



16   The Deceni'allzed Agricultural and Forestry Extension Project
                                                            "'~""','-------------------' 

                                                            ~                 AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES :N iNDONESIA.
                                                                NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




3.17  Crops. The total planted area did not significantly change across samples, but it did across time.
     It covered altogether almost 1,800 hectares in the Benchmark and only 1400 in the EoP survey. The
      reduction comes in tact from the rice cultivated area dropping from 1150 ha to 800. However, this
      is partly due to the reduction in the sample size (erosion of the sample). Importance of paddy for the
      respondent households is shown in Table 3.4 below.


Table 3.4. Distribution oEland and cropped land in the samples

                                                                BoP
                                           All    Dafep Reference      All Dafep Reference
                   Nb of Households        1172      384      384      1067       329            330
                   iI'otal area           1729       560      597      1407       452           502
                   Land/Househ old         1,48     1,46     1,56      1,32      1,37           1,52
                   Paddy (Ha)             1109       359      362       797       234           281
                                          64.1% 64.1%       60.6% 56.6% 51.8%                56.0%
                   Maize (Ha)              143        38        54      129        48             49
                                          8.3%      6.8%     9.0%     9.2% 10.6%               9.8%
                   Soybeans (Ha)             59        18       22       54        13             21
                                          3.4%      3.2%     3.7%     3.8%      2.9%           4.2%
                   Others (Ha)             418       145      158       427       157           151
                                          24.2% 25.9%       26.5% 30.3% 34.7%                30.1%



The majoritv of households plant one or two crops per year and a few up to five different crops. There is
no particular difference, except for a slight increase in the total number of households planting more than
three crops in the DAFEP sample compared to the Reference sample in the EoP survey.


Table     1\umber of crops grown and corresponding share of households

                              Number of                 Household count
                   Survey                                                                   Total
                                Crops             DAFEP    Spillover Reference
                                      1              48%         51%      51%                   575
                                      2              40%         39%      37%                   441
                                      3              11%          9%      12%                   121
                   Before
                                      4                2%          1%      0%                     9
                                      5                0%          1%      1%                     6
                              Total                   384         384      384                 1152
                                      1              46%         53%      52%                   488
                                      2              41%         37%      35%                   366
                                      3               8%          7%      10%                    81
               i   After
                                      4               5%          2%       2%                    28
                                      5               1%           1%      0%                     4
                              Total                   329         308      330                  967



                                                                Tre   Decentra!ized AgrlcultLral and Forestry Extension PrOject   17
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES
                                                                      J


     In relation with income assessment and the measurement of the project's expected achievement to raise
     income by 5% over the project period, five indicators were used 10 : total net income per capita (TNIC),
     agricultural net income per capita (ANIC), agriculture-related income per capita (ARNIC), agribusiness
     net income per capita (ABNIC) and non farm income per capita (NFIC), the first one being the sum
     of ANIC, ARNIC and NFIC, while ABNIC is a subcomponent of ARNIC. As shown in the text box
     below, all these indicators are needed due to the diversity of income sources at individual household level.
     These indicators measure the net value of monetary inflows of the household during the surveyed period
     (one year starting from the date of interview backwards). ANIC refers exclusively to the total value of
     yearly agricultural production (crops, animals and forest products). ARNIC includes selling of labour
     force, renting out of production factors such as land or equipment, and processing of agricultural products
     (ABNIC). NFIC includes other jobs, trade, sources of income such as remittances, etc.

     Figure 3.7. Comparison of income indicators in 2001 constant value


        2500000
                         Rp

        2000000


        1500000


        1000000


          500000


                  o
                           Before                After                Before              After              Before                After

                                     DAFEP                                 SPILLOVER                               REFERENCE
                                     OANIC                 .ABNIC                  · NonABNIC                   .NFIC


     Note: NonABNIC= ARNIC-ABNIC

     The samples show a marked increase in non-farm incomes. Agricultural net income per capita in contrast
     has declined. The significance of these results will be analyzed in subsequent chapters.




     10 All these indicators are only for farming households. In the EoP survey, 967 of 1067 households had cultivated lands. Other households are

     either landless or are not farming anymore. The income indicator for the whole sample is the yearly expenses per capita (see \Velfare indicators).




18   The Decentralized Agricultura i and Forestry ExtenSion PrOject
             DAFEP Impact:
 Analysis of Qyantitative and
       Qyalitative Indicators
4.1  1his chapter presents the detailed results of the data analysis starting with the quantitative
     indicators and followed by the qualitative indicators.


Income and Wef(are Cluster

4.2  111e income data described in the earlier section have their limitations in that at the time of the
     EOP survey, about 20 percent of the plots were cultivated but not harvested. This affected the
     value of several indicators, in particular agricultural net income per capita, yields, total production
     value per ha, input use efficiency, trade income per capita. This situation influenced the results in
     particular when comparing the Bifore and After results, since at Benchmark data collection period
     tbose cases were almost non-existent. Some analytical adjustments were made (see Annex 1) in
     order to minimize the effect of the missing production data when comparing the results. The yearly
     expenditure data (which excludes input expenditures) was also analyzed separately as an indicator of
     farmer welfare.




                                                          DAFEP Impact: Analysis of Quantitative and Quaiitative Indicators   19
                ------------ ------                                ..   -.~      .....   ~.
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA.                    ~

     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




                       Table 4.1. Before/After comparison of income indicators (farming households)

          Sample          Condition             TNIC              ANIC               CNIHA              ARNIC           ABNIC              NFIC
                          Before               1,375,117            545,359           7,296,341     I    215,599           80,054   614,160

         DAFEP
                          After                1,905,571            3~502,606                            269,614         218,~ 1,293,366
                                                530,454'         (201,   s          1,206,265 n5         54,015         138,689 I 679,206
                          Difference 11
                                                  38,6%            (36,9%)                16%               25%          173,2%     110,6%
                          Before               1,489,872           584,633           6,562,847           220,112          49,577    663,164
                          After                1,945,716           326,004           6,509,380           348,600         285,991  1,226,376
         Reference
                                                455,844'         (258,629)'          (53,468)n5         128,488         236,414'   563,212s
                          Difference
                                                  30,6%            (44,2%)                (1%)            58,4%          476,9%      84,9%


     Notefor all quantitative tables:
         ·    indicates that the difference between Before and After is significant using either T -Test or Confidence Interval. 

         *.   indicates that it is not 





     Interpretathm

     4.3  The difference in TNIC between Before and After situation for the DAFEP and Reference
          samples is significant and quite high (more than +30%) in constant terms. In the case of ANIC
          the difference between Before and After situation for DAFEP and Reference samples is significantly
          negative and high (around -40%) in constant terms. However, for the reasons explained in the
          Methodology chapter, ARNIC cannot be used as an indicator of absolute performance because of
          the problem of not-yet-harvested parcels. For this reason, an alternative indicator was built - the crop
          net income per hectare (CNIHA) based on the results from the harvested parcels. This indicator,
              while it does not include all parcels in the sample, helps nevertheless to reduce the bias since changes
              are calculated per hectare and not per capita. The table shows that the difference between After and
              Before, based on this indicator, is not significant in both samples. Furthermore, what most matters,
              again, is not the absolute value of the changes but the significance between samples. As the problem
              similarly affected all samples in the EoP survey, the results of significance analysis presented are still
              valid.

     4.4  Changes in ARNIC and in particular ABNIC are significant in both samples in constant terms,
          with a spectacular increase in ABNIC. The rate increase in the Reference sample is above that of
          the DAFEP sample. NFIC most contributes to the changes in TNIC. For this indicator, the Before
          and After situation is significantly different for the samples; income has been multiplied by t\vo.
          1he analysis in the annex on multivariate analysis provides a better understanding of the observed
          trends in agricultural income and in non farm income. The graph below synthesises the above results,
          expressed in constant rupiah at 2001 value.




     '1 Significance of resulrsAlternative calculation taking into consideration the variation in the number of respondents between Before and Ajta
     sample is fully identical, therefore the simple difference, easier to understand is used here. This applies to al1 indicators using units per capita.




20   DAFEP Impact: Analys's      Quantitative and Qualitative Irdlcators
                                                                                                                                 ·If'




                                                          "--               AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                                NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




Figure 4.1. Comparison of income indicators in 2001 constant value


                2,500,000



                2,000,000



                1,500,000



                1,000,000



                 500,000



                       o
                                before           afler            after        before         arer
                                         DAFEP           SPILLOVER                REFERENCE
Note:

                            ·
AIC=Agi"ic, Production; AGBC, Non-AGBC=Agric.related; NFIC = Nonform.




                                                             DAFEP Impact: AnalysIs of Quantitative a,cd Qualitative        21
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES
                                                                    J


     Table 4.3. Significance analysis of income indicators (DAFEP vs Reference)


                          I Variable            Condition                 Test Result       Output

                            TNIC             Be ore                  Si ni cant               <REF
                                             After                   Not Significant
                                             Change                  Not Significant

                            ANIC             Before                  Not Significant
                                             After                   Not Significant
                                             Change                  Significant        DAFEP> REF

                            CNIHA            Before                  Sign ifican t      DAFEP> REF
                                             After                   Sign ifican t      DAFEP> REF
                                             Change                  Not Significant

                            ARNIC            Before                  "
                                                                     "              t
                                             After                   Significant        DAFEP<REF
                                             Change                  Significant        DAFEP<REF

                            ABNIC            Before                  Sign ifican t      DAFEP> REF
                                             After                   Not Significant
                                             Change                  Significant        DAFEP<REF

                            NFIC             Before                  Not Significant
                                             After                   Not Significant
                                             Change                  Significant        DAFEP > REF

                          Note: *signijicant at 10% with DAFElJ              <   REF)


     Interpretation

     4.5  The table above presents the results of the logit analysis for each of income indicator, starting with
          the condition before the project (Bifore) and after the project (After). It shows also whether the
          changes in between Bifore and After conditions in the DAFEP sample are significantly different
          from the changes in the Reference sample and what is the nature of the change (> indicates higher;
          < indicates lower).

     4.6  This table shows that the change in the situation of households in the DAFEP sample was
          significantly different from the Reference households for some indicators. DAFEP had no significant
          impact on TNIC. However, the following section on Welfare which uses another indicator as a
          proxy of household net income (YEC) for all households shows a positive effect attributable to
          DAFEP. Meanwhile, as far as farming households are concerned, the significance tests indicate
          that the project did not achieve the objective of raising households' income by 5 percent over five
          years, compared to a sample of reference farmers. However, given that TNIC is computed with the



22   DAFEP Impact: AnalYSIS of Quantitative and QcJalitative Indicators
                                                                           \..                 AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                                                  NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES
                                                                                                                                                           ·



        incorporation ofARNIC and given that ARNIC cannot be satisfactorily used for the difference test,
        this conclusion must be taken with extreme caution. This does not mean either that DAFEP had no
        impact on households' income at aggregate level. In any case, the results show that there are other
        (more powerful) factors at work that have affected all samples in a similar way.

4.7  According to the testing method, change on households' agricultural income (ANIC) is related to
     the existence of DAFEP. However, for the reason indicated earlier (influence of 20% of not yet
     harvested parcels), no conclusion can be directly derived about the real significance of these changes.
     The results for CNIHA indicate that although DAFEP households had a significantly higher net
     income in both Before and After situations, there is no effect that can be directly related to DAFEP
     in the comparison of the change level according to the testing method. The DAFEP project cannot,
     thus, be associated with a significant change in farmers' agricultural incomes.

4.8  Reference households have performed better than DAFEP households with respect to ARNIC
     and ABNIC. Conversely, positive changes in NFIC are significantly higher for the DAFEP sample
     compared to the Reference sample. Further analysis will be needed to identifY which components of
     NFIC are related to this trend and whether they can be associated with some features of the project,
     and to clarifY the factors behind the observed significant results (see Annex 2).

4.9  It is problematic that even though the DAFEP sample showed significantly better income and
     welfare outcomes compared with the Reference sample, it is hard to explain why from the other
     evidence presented particularly since there is little change in the DAFEP sample on the agricultural
     practices/outcomes on which, presumably, DAFEP interventions would have had the largest
     impact. Most of the income growth was on the non-farm side of household activity. The difficulty
     in explaining why the DAFEP sample had these results opens the analysis to the critique that there
     was selection bias in the choice of DAFEP communities by the project managers in the districts
       e.g. more accessible, more open, more active, better organized, more social cohesion, which gave
     them a better foundation for improving non-farm income. However, the choice of the Reference
     sample was sufficiently rigorous to neutralize this critique of the results. One possible explanation
     could be that the farmers' benefited from the capacity building through DAFEP activities and this
     might have enabled farmers to become more confident and engage successfully non farm activities.
     However, this could not be tested. It is also theoretically possible of having positive externalities ofthe
     project that might have impacted on non-farm incomes, and thus that there might be an unexpected
     systemic effect affecting the DAFEP sample because of the DAFEP.


           ,im pact

4.10 TIlree indicators are used as proxies for DAFEP impact assessment on welfare: yearly expenses per
     capita (YEC) , assets value per capita (AVC) and share of food expenses per capita in total
     consumption expenses (SFC). As indicated earlier, the first one is equivalent to the total net income
     of all households, including households without agricultural income. It reflects the level of instant
     wealth in the household (amount of money circulating) while the second one reflects the state of
     more permanent wealth. Both are expressed in constant Rp/cap with 2006 values deflated by the
     increase in consumer price indexY The third one represents the relative importance of the budget
     needed by the household to fulfil the basic food needs of its members. It is calculated as a ratio
     between the amount of monetary expenses allocated for the purchase of food and the total budget

12 As the sample is not spatial and represent a population spread over nine provinces, a uniform deflator was applied based on the evolution of the
national pI ice consumer index from July 2001 to July 2006 from the Indonesian Central Bureau of Statistics.1he deflator is 58,06%.




                                                                               DAFEP Impact: Ana:ysls of QuantltaCive and Qualitative Indicators      23
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES
                                                                    .J

             of routine consumption (including housing, clothing, education, etc.)13. The general trend observed
             everywhere in the world is that the less the share, the wealthier the household.



     Table 4.4. Before!Mter comparison of welfare indicators

                            Sample           Condition                   YEC               AVC                  SFC
                                             Before                   1,139,661           3,846,761              48.81%
                                             After                    1,588,995           4,983,783               42.90%
                            DAFEP
                                                                       449,334"          1,801,296'              -5.910/0"
                                             Difference
                                                                         39,4%               46,8%                 13,8%

                                             Before                   1,229,715           4,347,160              50.12%
                                             After                    1,587,028           5,232,200              43.57%
                            Reference
                                                                       357,313"           504,786ns              -6.55°/0"
                                             Difference
                                                                         29,0%               11,6%                 12,8%




     Interpretation
     4.11  The difference between Before and After for the three welfare indicator for all samples is
           significant. The result for YEC indicates that DAFEP households have seen their income increase by
           at least 10% more than the non DAFEP samples. They show also a 30% increase in assets per capita
           compared to the Reference sample. The changes in food expenses share to consumption expenses
           (-5%) are similar in all samples.




     13In this calculation, rice produced and consumed by the household is not included since the objective is not to measure absolute but relative
     changes. It is assumed that the Dafep and the Reference samples do not differ significantly on rice self consumption. In the Benchmark survey,
     the average self sufficiency rate per household was 43 weeks for both Dafep and Reference samples. In the EoP this rate is 30 weeks also for both
     samples. Thus, the assumption is valid.




24   DAFEP Impact: AnalYSIS of Quantitative and Qualitalive Indicators
                                                       \...              AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                              NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES
                                                                                                                                   ·



Results of[t\FEPIReferencc comparison 


Table 4.5. Significance analysis of welfare indicators (DAFEP vs Reference) 



                    I Variable I Condition I Test Result                I Output
                      YEC            Before       Sign ifican t           DAFEP<REF
                                     After        Not Significant
                                     Change       Significant             DAFEP> REF

                      AVC            Before       Not Significant
                                     After        Not Significant
                                     Change       Significant             DAFEP> REF

                      SFE            Before      Not Significant
                                     After       Not Significant
                                     Change      Not Significant



Interpretation

4.12 The expenditures in the DAFEP sample were significantly lower before the project started, a result
     that is consistent with the observation ofDAFEP and Reference income situation before the beginning
     of the project (see Table 4.1). There are no significant changes in households' shares offood expenses
     between samples. Table 4.5 indicates that DAFEP households experienced a significantly higher
     change in the improvement of their welfare situation based on yearly expenses and asset value per
     ca::Jita. As YEC is also a proxy to household total net income, it indicates that a positive association
     can be made between the fact that the households belonged to the DAFEP project and an increase
     in their income and global wealth. This phenomenon however, is not independent from the results
     related to non farm income (NFIC).

\Velfa...   dj~ trilutioll   analvsis

4.13  In addition to the analysis of changes related to individual household welfare level, the potential
      impact of the project on equity through the measurement of wealth distribution (consumption per
      capita and assets per capita) was also computed within each sample. The shape of data distribution
      (that is, to what extent the distribution differs from a normal-Gaussian- shape) is characterized with
      several indicators reflecting asymmetric distribution and/or inequalities such as Skewness, Kurtosis,
      and Gini coefficients. The changes in the distribution indicators are thus compared between samples
      so as to identifY whether the DAFEP sample significantly differs from the Reference sample.




                                                          DAFEP Impact: AnalYSIS of Quantitative and Qualitative !ndicators   25
-"~.-"-"-"-"""--             """--   """-   "--""--""--"""--"--------
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:                  ...)
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES



     Table 4.6. Before/After comparison of welfare distribution


                                                Skewness                     Kurtosis                Gini Coefficient
                                             Before   After              Before     After            Before     After
                         YEC
                      DAFEP                       1.68        0.95 8        2.83         0.10'            0.37      0.36ns
                      Reference                   1.48       1.00 s         2.13         0.19 s           0.36     0.36ns
                         AVC
                      DAFEP                       2.39      6.23 s.         7.61       59.57 1 "          0.50      0.58 1
                      Reference                   3.39      2.89'·         16.69       12.34 ns           0.60      053 ns


     Note: s· means significant at 10%


     Interpretation

     4.14  In both samples, the Skewness and Kurtosis ofYEC decreased. This means that the shape of the
           curve representing the distribution of expenses tends to get closer to a Gaussian shape with a flatter
           form. It indicates an overall reduction of inequalities in expenses per capita. This result is confirmed
           by a slightly decreasing Gini coefficient in all samples. However, the test between DAFEP and
           Reference samples indicates that none of these changes is significant.

     4.15  However, assets per capita shows a reverse trend for the DAFEP sample, the distribution
           becoming more unequal as both Skewness and Kurtosis increase, a fact confirmed by an important
           increase in the Gini coefficient. The Reference sample shows an opposite trend with an important
           drop in Skewness and Kurtosis as well as Gini coefficient. The tests indicate that this change is
           significant between DAFEP and Reference samples.

     Productivity and technology cluster

     4.16  The project was expected to generate a 5% increase in productivity of the main farming systems
           by EoP in the villages. While not detailed, the concept of productivity seemed then to refer to land
           productivity, Le. the volume of agricultural output as measured in units per hectare. Participating
           farmers were also expected to adopt new/improved farming practices introduced by DAFEP
           extension workers.

     Productivity bnpact

     4.17  Land productivity as described above could not be directly measured since it would require a
           compound of various crops and it is impossible to mix tons of paddy with number of coconuts.
          Therefore, two proxies were used to measure the impact of DAFEP on this issue. The first one is an
           aggregate indicator, the gross value of all harvested crops divided by the total area of cropped land
           (HCHA). The second one is a specific indicator (the yield) for each of the main crops that is then
           analysed at plot level {xYLD)14. However, this indicator cannot fully represent productivity changes
           since not all crops could be analysed for statistical reasons 15.
     14 x is to be replaced by the name of the corresponding crop. 

     15Number of plots varies and the minimum number of required observations depends on the observed standard deviation of the Yield variable. 

     The crops where the number ofplots meets statistical requirement are rice, maize, and soybean. 





26   DAFEP Impact: Analysis cf Quantitative and Qualitative Indicators
                                                                              ~                     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                                                      NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




Results of Be forel After analysis

Table 4.7. BeforelAfter comparison of productivity indicators


                 Sample            Condition               HCHA       RkeYLD                  MaizeYLD SoybeanYLD
                                  Before                  10,547,283     3,587                     2,247      1,074
                                  After                   11,416,023     3,565                     2,400      1,831
               DAFEP
                                                           868,740n·     (22)"·                    152 ns      7570
                                  Difference 16
                                                                 8%       (1%)                    6.8%        70%
                                  Before                   9,007,712     3,680                     2,095        785
                                  After                    9,052,828     3,684                     2,127        813
               Reference
                                                             45,l16ns       4ns                      33 m      28 ns
                                  Difference
                                                                 0%         1%                      2%          4%



Interpretation

4.18  There is no significant change in the total value of agricultural production when comparing Before
      and After situation in DAFEP and Reference samples. Rice yields have remained unchanged in all
      samples and changes in maize yields are not significant. Only in the case of soybean a significant
      change can be observed in the DAFEP sample. However, this result is based on a smaller number of
      observations and the sensitivity of the crop to local climatic conditions is high.




I,;..ATte~;;ati~·~alccl;t;;n taking into consideration the variation in the number of respo~dents between Before and Mter sample have also been
made. Significance of results is fully identical, therefore the simple difference, easier to understand is used here. This applies to all indicators using
per capita unit.




                                                                                   DAFEP Impact: Analysis of Quantitative and Qualitative Indicators         27
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA;                  ,...,)
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES



      Table 4.8. Significance analysis of productivity indicators (DAFEP vs Reference)

                                     Variable         Condition              Test Result                 Output

                              HCHA                   Before              Sign ifican t             DAFEP> REF
                                                     After               Sign ifican t             DAFEP> REF
                                                     Change              Not Significant

                              RiceYLD                Before              Not significant
                                                     After               Not significant
                                                     Change              Not significant

                               MaizeYLD              Before              Not significant
                                                     After               Sign ifican t             DAFEP> REF
                                                     Change              Not significant

                              SoybeanYLD             Before              Not significant
                                                     After               Sign ifican t             DAFEP> REF
                                                     Change              Significant               DAFEP> REF



      I nteqwetation

     4.19  Households in the DAFEP sample show a significant difference for the total value of gross harvest
           in the Before and After conditions compared to the Reference sample, however the rate of changes
           observed between the two periods is not significantly different. DAFEP households achieved an 8%
           agricultural growth. The only significant difference in yield changes is observed for soybean where
           households in the DAFEP sample improved much more than in the Reference sample.


      Technology Impact

     4.20 The measurement of the adoption rate of new technologies by farmers was not included in the
          methodology. The effect ofDAFEP on technological change and on change in production systems is
          also quite difficult to measure since new/improved farming practices introduced by extension workers
          are location-specific and thus vary Widely from one place to another. Four proxy indicators were
          identified whose combination can be reasonably considered an appropriate measurement of these
          changes. The first one is the total value ofinput per hectare (TVIHA). It is sought to reflect a higher
          intensity in cropping patterns and therefore through DAFEP/Reference comparison the impact of
          the extension services in terms of intensification. While this proxy could be disputable in developed
          countries where modern and already capital intensive agriculture is seeking to become more effective
          by reducing input use, it is still considered relevant for the case of Indonesia given the current low
          level of input use by households. The second indicator is an input/output ratio measured in monetary
          value (lOR) for rice, maize and soybeans. Thus, a lower ratio means higher input efficiency.



     17 DAFEP targets were specified as a given percentage of farmers per village. Data collection would have required a representative sampling at

     village level for each project village resulting in a very high survey cost.




28   DAFEP Impact: AnalYSiS of Quantitative and Qualitative Indicators
     ... 
       -~   ...   --.-~    .....-   -... - - - - ' - - " - -       -_._--
                                                                   "'--              AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA.
                                                                          NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES



4.21  Changes in production systems are estimated through a diversification index (Dl) and the calcula
      tion of trade income per hectare (TlHA). The former is simply obtained by counting the number of
      different crops grown by households in the sample, whatever the number of respondents growing
      the crops. The latter indicates an orientation towards more commercial agriculture and is therefore
      an indirect measurement of the capacity of the extension system to be more agri-business oriented 18 ·
      When associated with a higher diversification index at sample level, it would be acceptable to consider
      that it helps measure an evolution of production systems. TlHA was calculated using the method
      indicated for computing CNlHA.


Result!; of Before/After analysis

Table 4.9. Before/After comparison of technology indicators

        Sample       Condition        TVIHA    IORrice lt           IORmz"         IORsbn Ncrop                   TIHA
                     Before          1,100,887      34.3%              33.5%         55.59%  20                    8,034,8%
                     After           1,419,359     28.5%               27.9%         31.26%  21                    7,795,273
     DAFEP
                                     318,472 n&   (5.9%)&            (5.6%>,,"      (24.3%)   1                  (239,622)n
                     Difference
                                        28.9%      17.2%               16.7%          43.7%                           (3.0%
                     Before
                     After
                                       909,~
                                     1,146,2
                                                 32.48%
                                                   31.0%
                                                                      14.73%
                                                                      20.08%
                                                                                      ~
                                                                                     23.76%
                                                                                             19
                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                   6,954,288
                                                                                                                   7,227,059
     Reference
                     Difference      236,994'"   (1.4%)n.            (5.3%)'"      (19.9%)"   1                      272,771
                                        26.1%      (4.3%)            (35.6%)         (45.5%)                        (3.9%)m


Note: TVIHA differencefor DAFEP and Reference is significant at 10% level


Interpretat ion

4.22  TVIHA shows that households' inputs use increased in both samples in constant value. For lOR,
      changes are significant for rice in the DAFEP sample and for soybean in both samples. Diversification
      as measured by the total number of different crops grown does not change. The diminution in the
      value of trade income per hectare affects both DAFEP and Reference samples.




 As indiUlted in the Immediate Objectives in Appendix 2, DAFEP PIP Annexes.




                                                                      DAFEP Impact: AnalysIs of Quantitative and Qualitative Indicators   29
- - - - -..   -~---.          ------                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _...._ 
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:                .,,)
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




     Table 4.10. Significance analysis of productivity indicators (DAFEP vs Reference)

                                 Variable          Condition              Test Result       Output

                              TVll-IA             Before               Significant       DAFEP> REF
                                                  After                Not Significant
                                                  Change               Not Significant

                              IORrice             Before               Not Significant
                                                  After                Not Significant
                                                  Change                     cant        DAFEP> REF

                              IORmz               Before               Sign ifican t     DAFEP> REF
                                                  After                Not Significant
                                                  Change               Not Significant

                              IORsbn              Before               Significant       DAFEP> REF
                                                  After                Not Significant
                                                  Change               Not Significant

                              TIHA                Before               Sign ifican t     DAFEP> REF
                                                  After                Not Significant
                                                  Change               Not Significant


     In tcrprctati on

     4.23  Changes in the total value of input used per hectare are not significant between DAFEP and
           Reference. The project cannot be associated in a significant way, given the testing methods, with an
           intensification process that could bear witness of a technological change. However, the magnitude
           of changes that took place in input efficiency between DAFEP and Reference is tested significant
           for rice. In the DAFEP sample, households traded a larger amount of products before and after the
           project compared to the Reference sample but the impact of the project on trade income per hectare
           is not tested significant.


     (hmlitative assessment results

     4.24 This section briefly summarizes the results of the assessment of qualitative indicators. As indicated
          earlier, these are grouped into four clusters so as to provide a more comprehensive approach. These
          clusters correspond respectively to extension, links, empowerment and awareness and are composed
          of nominal and ordinal variables. The following section presents the results of the extension and links
          cluster only.




30   DAFEP Impact: Analysis of Quantitative and Quantatlve hdlcators
                                                         ~                 AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                               NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES



Extenslon

4.25 This first cluster of qualitative indicators directly refers to this issue through a series of six variables
     that have been designed to assess the impact of DAFEP on access to information. These are five
     ordinal indicators: availability of agriculture information (AAI), willingness to pay for agriculture
     information (WPAY), accessibility to extension workers (AEW), extension meeting frequency
     (EMF) and improvement in access to agricultural information (IA<\I), and two nominal indicators:
     the best sources of agriculture information (SAl), and extension methods applied (EMA). The
     ordinal variables are combined into a single indicator reflecting general access to extension services
     (GAES).


Comparing the Before and After situation ill the samples

Table 4.11. BeforelMter comparison within each sample for ordinal extension indicators


                      Sample          Level     AAI      WPAY         AEW         EMF       IAAI      GAES
                                     5%        +5       +N5          +5           -5        +N5       +5
        I   DAFEP- Household
                                     10%       +5       +N5          +5           -S        +NS       +S
                                     5%        +NS      +NS          +5           -S        -S        +S
            Reference - Household
                                     10%       +5       +N5          +5           -5        -S        +5



In terp ,·etatio 11

4.26 Households have better accessibility to agricultural information (AAI), but they don't show any
     change in the willingness to pay for agricultural information although there is positive trend in
     this attribute (WPA Y). Accessibility to extension worker increases significantly in all samples, but
     paradoxically there is a significant negative change in extension meeting frequency. Improvement
     in the availability of agricultural information is rated as positive and non significant for the DAFEP
     respondents and positive and significant for the Reference sample. Altogether changes are positive
     and significant for all household samples. However, chi-square tests applied to GAES indicates that
     the degree of these changes altogether is not significant.




                                                            DAFEP Impact: Analysis 01 Quantitative ard Qualitative Indicators   31
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENS!ON SERVICES IN INDONESIA.                   ..../
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES



                                                                     1    ;nation and Extension Methods

     Table 4.12. Before/After comparison of the best sources of information


                                                   DAFEP- Household Reference- Household
                                       SAl
                                                  Before After Sig. Before After - Sig.
                            No know ledge           1.9%   1.4% -ns   3.8%     1.8%   -s
                            Other farmers          14.6% 27.0% +s    15.9% 30.5%      +s
                            Farmer trainer        10.50%   3.5% -ns  11.3%     3.9%   -s
                            Village leader         6.41%   9.9% +s    6.0%    8.0%    +s
                            Farmer groups         19.24% 13.7% -s    18.8% 16.4% -ns
                            Extension workers     35.42% 29.4% -s    33.3% 25.7%      oS
                            Traditional market     1.60%   2.8% +ns   1.0%     1.3% -ns
                            Sellers/distributors   0.44%   2.2% +s    0.9%     1.9% +ns
                            Social or ganizations 0.87%    1.5% +ns   0.9%     1.0% +ns
                            Traders                1.02% 1.39% +ns   1.21 % 1.13%    -ns
                            TV/radio               5.83% 3.55% -s    5.14% 4.66%     -ns
                            Newspapers             1.46% 1.08% -ns   0.45% 1.29% +ns
                            Poster                 0.58% 0.15% -ns   0.15% 0.16% +ns
                            Other                  0.15% 2.32% +s    0.15% 2.25%      +s


     Interpretation

     4.27 Households had been given the possibility to choose two best sources of information from a list of
          more than 10. 19 Significance tests highlight a shift in the sources of agricultural information from
          extension workers and farmer groups to other farmers. Here, "other farmers" refer to farmers with no
          specific position as "official" sources of information (as opposed to contact farmers, group leaders).
          Significance tests highlight a shift in the sources of agricultural information from extension workers
          and farmer groups to other farmers. This result is difficult to interpret. On one hand, one might say
          that extension workers were less important as best source of information, but on the other hand, it
          could be argued that extension workers were successful in linking farmers with other farmers, the
          latter becoming their best source of information. However, since the results are highly similar in all
          samples, it is hardly likely that the project had an effect on this trend.




     19 This list was not given to the farmers so as not to influence them and make them choose the answers that they thought would please the
     enumerator. However, in the Benchmark survey enumerators had read the list to the household members at the time they discussed the topics,
     introducing thus a bias in the frequency of people unable to proVide an answer, which explain the difference berween Before and After on this
     point. This applies also for the next E.M.A. nominal indicator.




32   DAFEP Irnoact: AnalYSIS of Quantitative and Qualitative Indicators
                                                      \..               AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA
                                                            NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




Table 4.13. Before/After comparison of extension methods implemented household samples



                                        DAFEP- household          References- household
                         EMA
                                       Before After Sig.          Before   After Sig.
                No knowledge            1.2%   15.7% +s             3.8%    21.1% +s
                PPL visits              21.5%    17.9%      -5      21.5%        18.0%       -5
                Small meetings          23.5%    13.5%      -5      18.2%        16.1%       -5
                Big meetings            16.0%    14.0%      -5      17.2%         9.9%       -5
                Farmer teacher           3.7%     3.6%   -ns         4.1%         2.5%       -s
                Internship               1.5%     0.2%    -s         0.9%         0.2%      -ns
                Demplot                 12.0%    21.5%    +s        14.4%        19.8%      +ns
                Evaluation meetings      1.2%     0.9%   -ns         1.3%         0.8%      -ns
                Radio Broadcast          0.0%     0.0%   +ns         0.5%         0.4%      -ns
                TV Broadcast             0.0%     0.5%   +ns         0.3%         0.4%      +ns
                Newspappers              0.0%     0.0%   +ns         0.0%         0.0%      +ns
                Field study              4.0%     4.2%   +ns         2.8%         1.6%       -s
                Meeting private indo     0.6%     0.2%   -ns         0.3%         0.6%      +ns
                Meeting researchers      1.0%     0.4%   -ns         1.3%         1.0%      -ns
                Courses/exercises        4.9%     5.1%   +ns         2.4%         4.7%      +ns
                Others                   8.8%     2.4%    -s        10.9%         2.7%       -s




Intcrpreta rion

4.28 The results show that in the household samples meetings with the PPL (field extension workers)
     were less frequent than in the Benchmark survey. Conversely, demonstration plots increased
     significantly in DAFEP and not in Reference. While the first results could be interpreted as the
     reduction of extension presence at village level, it could also be considered as a higher efficiency
     of extension activities, since less meetings and visits are accompanied with more hands-on field
     activities in the DAFEP sample.


'Ihe L,; oks c1u.;;ter

4.29 1his cluster relates to the expected effect of DAFEP on changes in farmers knowledge, attitudes
     and skills. The cluster here focuses on the links between farmers and their upstream and downstream
     agricultural environment. The cluster includes five ordinal variables: accessibility of input markets
     (AIM), accessibility of agriculture input information (AAII), joint purchase of agriculture input
     (TPAI), accessibility ofoutput markets (AOM), and joint marketing of agricultural outputs (TMAO).
     One nominal variable is also related to this cluster, sources of capital (SC). These variables are
     combined into a single indicator reflecting the improvement in upstream and downstream links
     (IUDI).




                                                         DAFEP Impact: Analysis of Quantitative and Qualitative Indicators   33
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:                .../
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




     Table 4.14 Before/After comparison within each sample for ordinal links indicators


                         Sample                   Level       AIM         AAII      JPAI    AOM    JMAO    IUDI   J
                                                 5%            +5         +N5       - N5     +N5    -N5    +5     !
               DAFEP- Household
                                                 10%           +5         +N5        -5      +N5    - N5   +5     I
                                                 5%            +5         +N5       -NS      +N5     -5    +5     I
               Reference - Househol d
                                                 10%           +S         +N5        -5      +N5     -5    +5     I


     4.30 All households have a significantly better accessibility (fewer barriers) to input market in general.
          Although there is no significant change in accessibility to input information, there is a positive trend.
          Joint purchasing ofinputs has not experienced a significant change, and the tendency is negative. There
          are no significant changes in the access to alternative output markets, although again the tendency
          is positive. Again, there is no significant change in joint marketing of agricultural commodities, and
          the negative tendency is similar to the joint purchased of inputs. The composite indicator (IUDI)
          resulting for the computation of the former ones shows a significant positive change in overall links
          upstream and downstream agriculture for all households samples.


     Cross comparison DAP'EP versus Reference

     4.31  Chi-square tests indicate that for JPAI and JMAO there is a significant difference between
           DAFEP and Reference. For JPAI, the Reference sample shows a significantly higher positive
           change compared to DAFEP (that is more joint purchase of input). Conversely, DAFEP sample
           shows a significantly higher positive change in joint marketing of agricultural products. For all other
           indicators, including the composite indicator IUDI, there is no significant difference.

     Nominal variables ana~vsis: Source rifCapital

     Table 4.15. Before/Mter comparison of the sources of capital for the farmer sample

                                                  DAFEP-household                 Reference-household
                              SC
                                              Before       After         Sig.    Before    After   Sig.
                      Individual               49.7%        91.0%         +s      49.0%    93.0%    +5
                      Gose Relative            32.1%         4.6%         -5      28.4%     4.6%    -s
                      Lenders                  18.2%         4.3%         -5      22.6%     2.3%    -5


     In tcrprctation

     4.32 All samples follow a similar pattern with similar magnitudes showing a decrease in the share of
     external sources of capital in favour of own capital. This trend can be associated with the increase in total
     income at household level, in particular with non farm income.




34   DAFEP Impact: AnalysIs of Quanlltat:ve and QuaHative Indicators
                                                            - - - - - - -....- -.... - -.... - -... - -...   --~~--
                                                        ~                 AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA.
                                                              NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES



Svnthe.;is ofthe results

4.33 The following tables provide a synthesis of the results. Highlighted in Bold case are indicators
     where changes occurred between Before and Mter situations, where there is a significant difference
     between DAFEP and Reference and where this difference favours the DAFEP sample. Indicators
     in Italic Bold case correspond to situations where the difference favours the Reference sample. When
     indicators are not highlighted, either there is no change in the Before and After situation, or that these
     changes are not significant when comparing DAFEP and Reference samples.

4.34 The table shows that most significant changes occurred in the Income and Welfare cluster of
     indicators, DAFEP households showing a significant improvement in their overall welfare
     situation compared to the Reference sample (positive changes in yearly expenditures that are a
     proxy of total net income for all households and in non farm income and assets per capita). The
     project thus succeeded in increasing households' income by 5% as targeted at the beginning of the
     project, (in constant terms). DAFEP households also performed better in agricultural income per
     capita, though the difference in the After and Before situation is negative for all samples.

4.35  However, the analysis of the technology and productivity cluster shows that significant changes
      in favour ofDAFEP households are rare. They relate to only three indicators: soybean yield and input
      me ratio in rice and soybean cultivation. Altogether the direct impact ofDAFEP on technology and
      productivity indicators has been limited. In particular, there are no significant changes in the yields
      of rice, the major and most common crop grown in the samples and in net income from trade.

4.36 In relation with qualitative indicators, this impact evaluation study shows that, based on the
     statistical approach used, sampling, conception of the questionnaire, data collection, data analysis
     and significance tests-, the project seemed to have not very much changed the target group as far as
     attitudes, skills and practices related to extension are concerned. Indeed, while positive changes have
     occurred in this field between the Benchmark survey and the EoP survey, they cannot be specifically
     considered as an impact of the project.




                                                           DAFfY impact: Analysis of Quantitative and Qualitative Indicators   35
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA.
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES
                                                                   J

                                                                           dts fo.- DAFEP performance indicators (at 5%
                                                                         ,Hors

                                                                                                     Significance

                                                                               I   Before! After'"       DAFEP vs Reference"''' 


                                                                                                                             20
       Total Net Income per capita (Rp) farming households                              Yes+                     Yes DAFEp
       Agricultural Net Income per Capita (Rp)                                          Yes-                     Yes DAFEP
       Crop Net Income per Hectare (Rp!Ha)                                               No                             No
       Agriculture Related Net Income per Capita (Rp)                                   Yes +                    Yes Reference
       Agribusiness Net Income per Capita (Rp)                                          Yes +                    Yes Reference
       Non Farm Net Income per Capita (Rp)                                             Yes+                      YesDAFEP
      . Total Yearly Expenses per capita (Rp) all households                           Yes +                     Yes DAFEP
      I Total Asset Value per capita (Rp)                                              Yes+                      YesDAFEP
       Share of food expenses (%)                                                      Yes +                            No
     Notes: *     1be + or - sign indicates the sense ifthe change (better or worse)
                  ** 1be name ofthe sample (DAFEP or Riference) indicates which one shows abetter peiformance
                  **.Nominal indicator, no test ifsignificance, but changes in all samplesfollow a similar trend.

     'I'able 4.17. Presentation of significam'e results for DAFEP performance indicators:
     Cluster ofTechnology and productivity .-elated indicators
                                                                                                     Significance

                                                                               I   Before! After'"       DAFEP vs Reference"" 



       Gross crop value per hectare (Rp/ha)                                              No                             No
       Rice Yield (t/ha)                                                                 No                             No
       Maize Yield (t/ha)                                                                No                             No
       Soybean Yield (tlha)                                                             Yes"                         YesDAFEP
       Coconut Yield (t/ha)                                                              No                             No
       Total value of input per hectare (Rp/ha)                                          No                             No
       Input/output ratio rice (%)                                                       No                          Yes DAFEP
       Input/output ratio maize (%)                                                      No                             No
       Input/output ratio soybean (%)                                                   Yes+                         YesDAFEP
       Diversification index (number)                                                    No                             No
       Trade income per hectare (Rp/ha)                                                  No                             No
     N?tes: ·     1be + or - sign indicates the sense ifthe change (better or worse)
                  ·· 7be name of the sample (DAFEP or Reference) indicates which one shows a better peiformance
                  ... Nominal indicator, no test ofsignificance, but changes in all samplesfollow a similar trend.




        At 10% level




36   DAFEP Impact: Analysis of Quan:i:ative and Qualitative Indicators
                                                                     ~                   AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA.
                                                                              NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES



Table 4.18. Presentation of signiflcance resnlts                                                                "   j

Cluster of Extension related indicators

                                                                                              Significance
                                                                               Before/ After"     DAFEP vs Reference""


  Extension methods implemented                                                     Yes 
                                No......
  Sources of agriculture information                                                Yes                                  No""" 

  Access to agriculture information                                                Yes +                                  No 

  Willingness to pay for agriculture information                                     No                                   No 

  Access to extension workers                                                      Yes +                                  No 

  Extension meeting frequ ency                                                     Yes -                                  No 

  Improvement in access to agricultural information                                Yes+                                   No 

 . General access to extension services                                            Yes +                                  No
Notes: *    The + or sign indicates the sense ~fthe change (better or worse)
            ·· 7he name ofthe sample (DAFEP or Reflrmce) indicates which one shows abetterpeljOrmance
            ..* Nominal indicator, no test ofsigniftcance, but changes in all samples follow a similar trend.



'Elble -4.19 Pnsentation of Significance results for DJ\ FEP perfonnance indicators
Clustc of ;~in·(s Related Indicators

                                                                                             Significance
                                                                         I    Before/After'"     DAFEP vs Reference*'"


 Accessibility of input markets                                                   Yes +                                  No
 Accessibility of agriculture input information                                     No                                   No
 Joint purchase of agriculture input                                                No                        Yes Reference
 Accessibility of output markets                                                    No                         YesDAFEP
 Joint marketing of agricultural outputs                                     Yes - (Reference)                           No
 SourcE~s   of capital                                                             Yes                                  No....'"
 Improvement in upstream and downstream links                                     Yes +                                  No

Notes: ·    The + or - sign indicates the sense I!lthe change (better or worse)
            .. The n,/me qlthe sample (DAFEP or Reflrence) indicates which one shows abetter peljOrmance
            ... Sommal indicator, no test ofsigniftcance, but changes in all samples follow a similar trend.



']]IC   result!- from the multivariate analysis (sec Annex 2) hugely endorse the above findings.

4.37  Overall, the results indicate that DAFEP extension agents were judged as "not good" to "good
     enough" on important key factors such as being experienced, having suitable knowledge on new
     technologies, having knowledge/understanding of local conditions, etc. Furthermore the study
     showed that the main qualities that were expected from extension workers by farmers are "experience"
     and "technical knowledge". This still corresponds to the traditional approach of extension services as




                                                                         DAFEP Impact: AnalYSIS of Quantitative and QLalitalive Indicators   37
                    -----             - - - - - - - - -....- - -....- -...                    ~   ....-   -...- . - -...- - - - - 
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:                    ~

     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES



             the means for transfer of technology. Finally, according to the farmers, the benefit ofjoining farmer
             groups were mainly exchange on farming/cultivating techniques (30.3%) and exchange of village
             development (23.0%). The benefit of exchange on farming/cultivating techniques shows a significant
             decrease meanwhile other benefits have increased significantly. Unfortunately detailed data on the
             other benefits cannot be processed in a similar way. The conclusion is that there was no significant
             change of routines done by extension workers, the DAFEP activities did not result in something
             more ground-breaking such as joint marketing in groups or joint purchasing.

     4.38  Weaknesses of the Impact Evaluation: Given the fact that the Farmer-Managed Activities
           (FMAs) - Component 1 was a major institutional innovation piloted by the project, the design of
           the EOP survey did not specifically identity the beneficiaries of the FMAs and of its impacts. The
           households selected in the DAFEP sample are households who participated in DAFEP activities,
           but since not all households received grants for FMA, there is no perfect overlap between DAFEP
           membership and FMA. The DAFEP sample was a sample of households participating in DAFEP
           activities. Many of the households in the benchmark survey (carried out before the implementation
           ofthe FMA component in 2002) did not participate in the FMA activities. This limits the usefulness
           of the evaluation to a certain extent. The analysis may have been more useful had it targeted FMA
           grant recipients versus the rest - DAFEP ( FMA recipients) Spillover ( same village not FMA
           recipients) and the Reference ( non-DAFEP, non-FMA similar villages). The funding of grants for
           addressing market failures in information was at the core of the project. The analysis unfortunately
           does not reveal whether this was a necessary part of the project or a desirable feature of future
           projects. Finally, the number of indicators (39) while attempting to be comprehensive perhaps could
           have been simplified to focus on key indicators that would have sufficed to demonstrate the impact
           of the project. Data quality and reliability are in general satisfactory (see Annex 1 for more details).




38   DAFEP Imoact: klaiYSls of Quantitative aCid Qua:itat've ICidicato's
                                                                    ·   $.;;1



                                                                  "'-.                AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                                                NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




                       Assessment of F armer

                       Managed Activities and 

                       Institutional Reforms 21 

5.1  A major weakness of the impact evaluation was that many of the households in the DAFEP
       sample did not participate in the farmer-managed activities (FMA) of component 1, the core
       institutional innovation of the project. Further, the impact ofthe institutional reforms at the district
       level were also not addressed. This section draws from the data and analysis of the F AO team that
       was responsible for the preparation of the ICR.

5.2  Development of FMAs and action planning to village commuOltles to assist in change from
     reactive to proactive farming was facilitated by participatory rural appraisal (PRA) techniques
     whereby farmers having common interests were involved in assessment and ranking of problems,
     potentials and alternative solutions. Various PRA techniques were evaluated in early phases and
     these were reduced to five to seven assessed by farmers to be the most useful. A supplementary PRA
     approach was specifically developed to cater for agro-forestry to focus on the community and its
     needs and identifY potential benefits of trees.

5.3  1he first cycle ofFMAs was started in most districts in September 2002 with sub-district extension
     workers playing a leading role in their preparation. Understanding of extension staff, farmers and
     other stakeholders ofDAFEP principles and concepts was poor. Farmer participation rates were low,
     planning processes were poorly understood and FMAs often had little relationship to better farm
     management or improved profitability of farm enterprises. Nevertheless, many of these early FMAs
     proved highly successful (Annex 4) thereby demonstrating to farmers what could be achieved. The
     second cycle ofFMAs was again delayed (until late in 2003), as was the third cycle, which commenced



 This chapter draws from DAFEP supervision reports and the DAFEP Implementation Completion Report, Report No. 33582,
21

November 2005.




                                                                   Assessment 01 Farmer·Managed Acltvlties and Institutional Reforrr·s   39
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA,              ...)
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




            in November 2004. I'\evertheless, by 2005 most participating villages had enthusiastically adopted
            the DAFEP model of farmer-led learning. There had been a marked improvement in the quality of
            FMA submissions, associated family agro-business plans and village action plans. ;Most participating
            villages visited by the ICR team reported examples of high adoption rates following training and
            numerous examples of high returns to the training investment (Annex 3). Isolated examples were
            noted where elite groups appeared to have captured the F;vtA process for personal gain with limited
            flow-on to other village members. Participation ofwomen has increased dramatically under DAFEP
            at all levels from farm budgeting, planning, income generating activities to village decision making
            through UPKGs and representation on DECs.

     5.4  From the Impact evaluation however, there were also complaints that the Farmer ;Managed
          Activities (FMA) activities did not allow for the acquisition of physical items directly related to
          agricultural production such as inputs, tools and equipment, credit/revolving funds. Building or
          rehabilitation of farm infrastructure was prohibited too. The philosophy behind the FMAs was that
          farmers participation in extension activities would be funded. Purchasing of inputs and equipment
          was authorised provided these would be used exclusively for extension purpose. Other types of
          activities included the funding of studies by farmers, exhibitions, visits to other areas, farmer field
          schools, demonstration plots, etc. Many participants expressed regret that the project did not supply
          them directly with credit, equipment or inputs for agricultural production.

     Institutional Reforms:

     5.5  The establishment of the Rural Extension and Information Centers at district (Balai Informasi dan
          Penyuluhan Pertanian BIPP) and sub-district (Balai Penyuluhan Pertanian BPP) levels were meant
          to consolidate extension programs and staff of isolated district agricultural service units for provision
          of sub-sector advice (food crops, estate crops, livestock, fisheries, and forestry). DAFEP aimed to
          strengthen this process by facilitating team-building within and between sectors and encouraging
          staff to develop an integrated extension program using farming systems approaches including agro
          forestry.

     5.6  At district level, the institutionalization of integrated extension services remains tenuous. Some
          districts, recognizing potential benefits from farmer-led approaches to extension using the DAFEP
          model, have supported integrated extension centers through guaranteed on-going finances and Bupati
          decree. In districts where decentralized, farmer-led extension is working well, and benefits accruing
          from application of DAFEP principles are recognized, there has been strong support from the head
          of the district (Bupati) and district parliaments in institutionalization of BIPP's (e.g. Magelang
          district Central Java and Maros District in South Sulawesi). Where there was strong support for
          DAFEP, funding has also been provided for expansion ofDAFEP concepts to other districts (e.g. in
          Maros district Rp 800 m for expansion to an additional 20 villages during 2005). Elsewhere support
          is weaker and in some cases BIPPs have either been abolished (Banyumas, Kotabaru, Tanah Laut,
          Timor Tengah Selatan Districts), or their echelon level downgraded in effect restricting the career
          path and status of extension staff. In many cases BIPPs/KlPPs are seen simply as cost centers and
          their potential contribution to poverty alleviation is not recognized.

     5.7  District Extension Committees (DECs) were established by Bupati decree in the participating
          districts to provide district level policy support for farmer-led extension, facilitate flows of
          information to meet farmer demands, assist in building linkages between farmer groups with NGOs,
          Universities and Industry. As such, the DEC was envisaged as potentially playing a pivotal role in
          achievement ofDAFEP objectives. While their objectives rely on committee members representing



40   Assessment of Farmer-Managed ActiVities and hstitutlOnal Reforms
           - - - - - - - - - - -....- - -.... - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
                                                       "--                  AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA.
                                                             NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




     all influential sub-sectors (Government, NGO, Research Institutes, Farmers, Agro-business, etc.),
     most DECs remained dominated by Government through an over-representation (usually 50 % or
     more) or perceived authority of Government members, and as yet have largely failed to realize their
     potential. DECs have not received information from BIPP/KIPPs on actual benefits accrued from
     implementation ofDAFEP at farmer level except for verbal reports and, where DEC is active (e.g.
     Magelang district), members have assessed impacts of FMAs for themselves through farm visits.
     This information failure significantly reduced the effectiveness ofDECs in fulfilling their roles such
     as establishing priorities for extension effort. Further external support and clearer definition of roles
     and responsibilities for both BIPPs and DECs is essential to consolidate progress so far.

5.8  Farmers and NGOs however were enthusiastic about the DECs: NGOs because of the informa
     tion forum it provides to focus and refine their district programs and farmers because, often for the
     first time, they have direct access to decision-makers. On the other hand, DEC meetings have often
     dealt with inconsequential issues and failed to engage decision-makers who are often represented
     by staff members with no end-of-line authority. There are examples of how DECs have facilitated
     engagement of research institutions in partnerships with farmers to solve issue-specific topics
     however, it will take time before these committees mature and begin to tackle long-term, industry
     wide or whole farming systems approaches to improving productivity. Partnerships with industry
     initiated through DECs have also begun to show benefit. For example, farmers have been able to
     negotiate a direct marketing agreement for rice produced throughout the Gowa district whereby
     they now receive 20% more for their product. But overall, institutional development impact has been
     modest at best.

5.9  DAFEP's principles of integrated, farmer-led extension based on establishing public-private
     partnerships have been enthusiastically accepted by many front-line extension workers. Such change
     requires extension workers trained in new extension methodologies of facilitation, participative
     processes, media etc. These extension workers require a whole systems approach to agriculture
     including business management and marketing. They are not technical specialists but generalists,
     and their role is one of facilitating technology transfer rather than providing this themselves. Under
     the DAFEP model, technical expertise in specialist fields is provided by agro-business, research
     institutions and relevant Dinas, facilitated by DEC. Management at the district level has yet to
     understand and put these principles into practice. Outside ofDAFEP, training for extension workers
     continues to focus on acquisition of technical skills and not new extension methodologies.




                                                        Assessment   ~,   Farmer-Managed Activities    Instltu'lonal Refon'1s   41
--- -----------------                                                                                 ---     -----------
    Concluding Discussion and
             Emerging Issues
6.1  Overall, the report card of DAFEP is mixed. While on the one hand, the project succeeded in
     improving farmer welfare, the impact on productivity and technological change was limited.
     Nonetheless, the lessons learned from DAFEP have important implications for the future of
     agricultural service delivery in Indonesia in the context of the broader structural transformation that
     is already underway. This chapter discusses some of the emerging issues.

Diversification and Rural Productivity

6.2  Perhaps the most striking result from the DAFEP impact evaluation is the secular increase in non
     farm incomes across the board. This is a clear indication that diversified farming will be the solution
     for farmers whose scale of operations or land quality does not enable them to support a family
     from rice farming income alone. Between 2001 and 2006, there was further fragmentation in
     the landholdings with the average area/household declining from 1.48 hectares to 1.32 hectares.
     Rice areas also shrunk from 64 percent of total cropped area to 56 percent. There was a dramatic
     increase in the cultivation of chillies across all samples. This also confirms broader trends in the
     economy. The most rapidly growing type of farming is horticulture, with horticulture farmers nearly
     doubling between 1993 and 2003 to 38 percent of all farm households (2003 Agriculture Census).
     Rapid urbanization and income growth is fueling changes in food consumption which increased
     by 8 percent (per capita, real) over 1996-2002. (Susenas, 2005). This consisted almost entirely of
     growth in high-value food consumption while per capita consumption oflow-value grains and tubers
     actually declined (Susenas, 2005). Even rural households remaining primarily engaged in agriculture
     can be expected to continue to rely on diversified income from other labor and business sources
     (because of small land holdings); these already account for half ofrural household incomes nationally
     (PATENAS).




                                                                          Concluding Discussion and Emergmg Issues   43
                                                                                                                                         .j



     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES
                                                                        ...J 

     6.3  Diversification means switching to higher-valued crops, livestock and fish production in response
          to new types of consumer demand. Small farmers will need technical assistance from either the public
          or private sector if they are to respond successfully to these new market opportunities. However,
          with the recent steep increase in rice prices 22 , the Government is taking important steps in several
          areas to boost productivity in the agricultural area notably the promotion of hybrid seeds, irrigation
          investments etc. However, current policies still fail to address the structural problems which inhibit
          productivity growth in the sector. In particular, public expenditures are still currently biased towards
          subsidies (on fertilizer, seed and credit) despite evidence suggesting that these subsidies have very
          limited impact on production or productivity.



     6.4  Farmer associations/rural producers organizations (RPOs) in Indonesia are still considerably weak.
          During the 32 years of "New Order" era (1966-98), Government policies called for a total control
          of the State over all the functions that could have been performed by RPOs which inhibited the rise
          ofgenuine and independent RPOs. Official organizations such as HKTI (Association ofIndonesian
          Farmers Groups and Fishermen Groups), the KrNA (National representative of the farmer, the
          "best farmers" are the members), and the village cooperatives (KUDs) were the only ones permitted
          to operate under the aegis of the state. While there was some success from these state-sponsored
          groups in supporting the rice intensification package in some irrigated areas, the numerous cases of
          malfeasance and negative environmental impacts (decreasing soil fertility, increasing pests) resulted
          in a general distrust oHarmers towards all forms of State intervention in organizational development.
          Yet experience from other countries indicate that strong RPOs can be a key asset for agricultural
          development. However, due to the unpleasant recent history, the development of genuine farmers'
          organizations is still a slow process and RPOs in Indonesia are still on need of a firm basis on which
          to establish their growth (Roesch et aI, 2002).

     6.5  With support from DAFEP, the Village Extension Management Unit (Unit Penge10la Kegiatan
          Gabungan UPKG) received an annual grant (FMA grant) to finance extension activities identified
          by a group of farmers and approved by the District Extension Committee. The UPKG scheme is
          an embryo of a village farmer organization/association and through this farmer groups developed
          project proposals to receive training to start up or improve their farming activities (for example fish
          growing, duck rising, biological coffee, corn, vanilla, bee-keeping etc.). There is a need however
          to clearly separate the role of UPKG which is a farmer village committee (UPKG selects project
          proposals) from the role of producer groups who prepare and implement projects. The UPKG/FMA
          scheme can be improved and systematized as an effective way to facilitate small farmers' access to
          technology and markets. UPKG leaders should be accountable to the farmers to ensure that UPKG
          is inclusive and not serving a few large or influential farmers as some of the evidence seems to
          suggest. The village-level producer groups need to be encouraged to federate at district and provincial
          levels. These federations could then engage in partnership activities with private enterprises and/
          or extension and/or research institutions with appropriate technical assistance that keeps the
          government at arm's length. In addition to technical support, farmer associations/federations also
          need to receive organizational support to help them resolve inevitable organizational management
     22 Rice prices have increased by 110% since January 2004 - far faster than the general rate of inflation (32% over the same period). 111is large
     increase in the price was the main reason for the increase in poverty between 2005 and 2006 the 37% increase in the rice price over the least year
     alone makes it likely that poverty will increase again in 2007. The main reason for the dramatic increase in prices is government policy Although
     the fuel price rises in 2005 triggered high inflation, the increase in rice prices has been far     than the increase in input costs for rice production.
     1\1oreover, world rice prices have been quite stable - Indonesian prices are now 73% above world prices. The main reason for the increase in prices
     is the rice import ban in place since January 2004              periodic but increasing shortages in supply as imports can not fill the gap. The effect
     has been particularly severe this year because of a moderate El Nino which has delayed planting and will delay the harvest. (\Vodd Bank, 2007,
     forthcoming)




44
                                                                       "'-.                 AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                                               NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




      difficulties which will arise when implementing their activities (issue offree riders, internal conflicts,
      accountability mechanisms to members and member organizations, transparency, participation etc.).
      While the approach has its danger in that farmer groups remain active only as long as a project
      provided subsidies or access to resources (Cary, Zijp, Byerlee, et al. 2002), there are other examples
      (Senegal, Colombia, Mali, Equador) where RPOs are increasingly partnering with research and
      extension agencies. With Indonesia moving towards a more pluralistic institutional arrangements for
      extension, building the capacity of RPOs and other service providers will be essential to empower
      users and expand the pool of qualified service providers.

Research-Extension Linkages

6.6  The institutional and management reforms (supported by the \-\Torld Ban, \VB and the Asian
     Development Bank, ADB) has helped IAARD to transform its organizational structure and
     institutional culture towards a demand-driven, "farmer first" strategy. The establishments of the 1423
     Assessment Institutes for Agricultural Technology (AIAT) to serve the regionalization ofagricultural
     R&D has arguably been the most significant change in the National Agricultural Research System
     Ci'-IARS). While some progress has been made over the past 10 years, capacity remains generally
     weak and is substantially failing to deliver improved technologies and practices to farmers and
     agribusiness. Indonesia's agricultural research expenditure has declined dramatically since the early
     1990s compared with its neighbors. Real expenditure on public agricultural research in 2000 was no
     greater in real terms than a decade earlier, and presently ranks Indonesia near the bottom compared
     with other Asian countries in terms of agricultural research spending relative to agricultural CDP.
     However, the separation of the research and extension functions within the organization of the
     l\10A (between IAARD and AAHRD) has also militated against both ensuring focus on farmer's
     problems while setting the research agenda, and effective dissemination of research results which
     have till now, relied heavily on the use unidirectional 'technology transfer' approaches, supported
     by field extension methods such as demplots, as the primary farmer extension method over the past
     decade. lhe province-level BPTPs are the major adaptive R&D providers at this level, and they are
     being required to continue an evolution from being research organizations to technology assessment
     and knowledge transfer units.

6.7  Development of a more multidisciplinarylfarming systems approach as piloted by DAFEP is
     needed to tackle identified real-world production issues that often span several segments of a value
     chain, rather than the present situation where researchers usually work in disciplinary isolation,
     often producing research outcomes that address only part of the original problem and therefore
     have limited immediate application. The stagnant level of rice yields points to the need for research
     on how to increase yields without increasing costs i.e., how to improve rice profitability- in the
     interests of both farmers incomes and stability of food prices. Nevertheless the fact that rice based
     indicators were not significantly different in DAFEP and reference groups is not surprising since the
     choice of enterprises for focus by farmers was open and incentives for rice have been poor. Donors
     (including the Bank) have also pursued separate projects under the research and extension agencies
     that has also contributed to the disconnect. Building on the lessons of DAFEP, the Bank's new
     Farmer Empowerment through Agricultural Technology and Information (FEATI) project, will for
     the first time combine research and extension in a more comprehensive approach) which responds
     to the above set of issues.




 13 of" hich are fully functional today :.vlaluku having been burned down during sectarian violence in 1999,




                                                                                                Concluding Discussion and Emerging Issues   45
---,-_._---...._ .         __ _ - _ _ - - - - - - - - - -
                                ...       ...                              ....- - - - .   -------------
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:      ",.,)
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




     6.8  DAFEP was predicated on the idea that lack of information was a binding constraint in farm
          incomes. The data on diversification and decline in rice areas shows that other factors were probably
          at least as important - for example agricultural prices, which would have been declining for rice during
          the implementation period. Secondly, the constraint of credit to apply any new ideas, particularly in
          Eastern Indonesia but also elsewhere owing to various access constraints in the banking system was
          a critical factor the FlVIA grants did not increase access to implementation credit.

     6.9  Evidence from the survey shows that extension workers are not the most important source of
          information and extension. This confirms other findings elsewhere (Faure and Kleene, 2004) stating
          that farmers learn more from others farmers than from external advisors. Projects like DAFEP
          intend to promote a paradigm change in the profile of effective extension workers. Technical skills
          become less important than communication skills, ability for facilitation, and a capacity for human
          relations. Commitment is also a key issue that is facilitated if the extension worker comes from the
          area, has rural roots, speak the local language. As a key issue is whether the farmers trust them and
          confide in their capacity, we should also make sure that the beneficiaries are involved in "difining
          criteriafor selection and quality standards (an expert is only an expert ifslhe is recognised)" (Christoplos and
          Kidd 2000). Contemporary thinking on new extension roles emphasizes that the new extensionist will iften
          need to be one-third management specialist, one-third communications specialist, and one-third technical
          specialist. (Gary, Zijp, Byerlee, et al. 2002:26).

     6.10 "While DAFEP envisaged that information of interest to farmers would be disseminated through
          printed, visual and audio media, there is little evidence to indicate that this was successful. It was
          intended that a Farmers' Information and Technology Promotion Service (FITPS) be established
          at the district extension centers to improve farmers' access to information on technology, credit,
          markets and farmer network activities. However, the ICR notes that it was difficult to ascertain how
          demand for the material was identified and farmer groups have not rated it highly. Similarly, there
          has been little or no recognition of other services ofFITPS.

     6.11  ICTs as tools are still underutilized in extension services (Alex et aI, 2004). The low capacity of
           rural information and communication technologies (ICT) development is widely acknowledged to
           be a barrier to increasing rural incomes and productivity in Indonesia. Rural communities need
           up-to-date information on sources, availability and costs of inputs for production, and also on the
           potential of different techniques and technologies used for production, processing and marketing.
           The information that is often most relevant to improving livelihoods is non-technical, including the
           role and responsibilities of different institutions in the provision of key services, such as agricultural
           extension, credit, health and education, and where to go and who to ask for more specific information.
           ICT offers an opportunity to make rapid progress. It is important that information is available in an
           appropriate format and language, and that rural communities have the capacity to access, analyze and
           act on it. With decentralization and the new political and institutional environment in Indonesia,
           there is an opportunity to use ICT to support the agricultural development agenda and to improve
           the delivery of agricultural services in innovative ways.

     Future of Extension Services in a Decentralized Context

     6.12  Extension faces a major challenge in Indonesia, similar to public sector extension systems in many
           countries that are seeking to advance structural, financial and managerial strategies to reform
           extension (see for example Rivera, 1991; Rivera and Gustafson, 1991; Rivera and Zijp, 2002). The



46   Concluding Jiscuss:on ard Emer gl1g
                                                        "--.            AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA
                                                               NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




      literature indicates that there is no one-size fits all even in the same country. However, the public
      sector continues to play an important role in coordination and poverty reduction objectives. Various
      extension approaches need to be considered and have to be flexible to accommodate changing policies,
      technologies and the needs of farmers. While there is a move towards a more pluralistic system of
      extension funders and service providers, the public sector still continues to play an important role.
      Private extension services will assume greater importance in the dry-land cash cropping sub-sector in
      eastern Indonesia. This is because exportable commodity production is being increasingly supported
      by the private sector. However, quality enhancement for service providers - public or private
      continue to be a big gap in Indonesia and elsewhere (Alex et aI, 2004).

6.13  National development priorities include improving extension, and an acknowledgment that new
      approaches will be required in the context of the changed institutional context of decentralized
      extension service delivery. However, evidence from DAFEP indicates that the commitment oflocal
      governments is key to improving extension service delivery. Local governments need to be assisted
      to take up applicable models as a part of: (i) moving from top-down to participatory approaches
      to extension subject matter prioritization and delivery; (ii) shifting the balance from input and
      technology dissemination to dissemination of market and upstream information and technology;
      and (iii) moving from centrally-managed extension services to decentralized services, and increase
      space for private delivery of extension services.

6.14 PartiCipatory extension approaches such as those pioneered by DAFEP face their own challenges
     (Alex, et al 2004). These approaches require changes in the roles for extension workers - from
     messengers to facilitators - and changes in the way messages are transferred to farmers, organizational
     srructures, facilities offered to local communities. While DAFEP was reasonably successful in some
     respects, the results of the qualitative analysis shows that it is quite a challenge to change the mental
     processes and working routines that extension workers have had for over two decades. In these
     routines, technology and production are the key words and the processes are invariably linear and
     top-down. Similarly, changing farmers' routine and expectations with regard to extension services
     i~ also challenging. Farmers too, for decades have lived with the custom of grouping in order to get
     fimds and doing what the government tells them to do. Indonesia, as elsewhere, much learning is
     still needed on how to develop democratic procedures, inelusiveness, and linkages that integrate
     r~lral communities. The dramatic increase in the importance of non-farm incomes underscores the
     premise that extension is beingjorced to embrace a broadened mandate [ ..} shiftingfrom an "agricultural"
      /.1 a "rural"focus in programs, recognizing that agricultural productivity may not always be the best way
     /.? improve peoples' livelihoods (Alex, et a1. 2002). The promise of participatory extension is that local
     people who have a sense of ownership in projects and activities learn to be independent through
     appropriate technical support. This independence and self-reliance is the ultimate purpose of
     promoting participation in extension development




                                                                            Concluding Discussion and Emerging Issues   47
-----------------                                  -------~--------~--------------
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA.   "",,)
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




48   References
                                                                                                    !l '6




                                                                              "--                  AGRiCULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                                                     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




                                  ANNEX 1. Methodology and Indicators

 1.1

A list of 39 indicators was established in consultation with DAFEP PMU and World Bank staff. These
indicators reflected the concern of the project designer to assess various (economic, social and technical)
impacts the project was expected to have on the target group. As a result of the multidimensional function
ofthe project, this list included quantitative and qualitative indicators divided into six clusters. The final list
of indicators includes 15 quantitative indicators measuring income, welfare, productivity and technology
changes and 30 qualitative indicators related to changes in extension, links, empowerment and awareness,
as presented below.

Clu.fter ofIncome and Weifare indicatorJ
   Total Net Income per capita (Rp)
·  Agricultural Net Income per Capita eRp)
   Crop Net Income per Hectare (Rp/Ha)
·  Agriculture Related Net Income per Capita eRp)
·  Agribusiness Net Income per Capita (Rp)
   NOl~ Farm Net Income per Capita eRp)


Clu.fter ofUTeifare indicators (all indicators are in Rp/capita)
   Total Yearly Expenses per capita eRp)
·  Total Asset Value per capita (Rp)
   Share of food expenses in the household consumption budget (%)

Cluster ofProductivity and Technology indicatorJ
   Gross crop value per hectare (Rp/ha)
·  Yield (t/ha) for rice, maize, soybean, and coconut
·  Total value of input per hectare (Rp/ha)
   Input/output ratio (%)
   Di\-ersification index (number)
   Trade income per hectare (Rp/ha)

Cluster ofExtension related indicatorl4
·  Availability of agriculture information (perception, ordinal)
·  VVillingness to pay for agriculture information (perception, ordinal)
·  Accessibility of extension workers (perception, ordinal)
   Extension meeting frequency (factual, ordinal)
   Im:Jrovement in access to agricultural information (perception, ordinal)
   Sources of agriculture information (factual, nominal)
   Extension methods applied (factual, nominal)
   General access to extension services (composite, ordinal).




24 'Ordhal'refers to the possibility to rank the factors so that results can be measured with scores. 'Nominal' indicates that there are several options
and results are expressed in a distributive form (share). 'Factual' relates to what the respondents do, or to what happened. 'Perception' relates to
what the respondents think




                                                                                                                                        awj !nd,cators     49
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA.
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES
                                                     ..J

     Cluster ofLinks related indicators
     ·  Accessibility of input markets (perception, ordinal)
     ·  Accessibility of agriculture input information (perception, ordinal)
     ·  Joint purchase agriculture input (factual, ordinal)
     ·  Accessibility of output markets (perception, ordinal)
     ·  Joint marketing of agricultural outputs (factual, ordinal) 

        Sources of capital (factual, nominal) 

     ·  Improvement in upstream and downstream links (composite, ordinal)

     Cluster of Empowerment related indicators
     ·  Participation in implementing development projects (factual, ordinal)
     ·  Desire to participate in decision making (perception, ordinal) 

        Group meeting frequencies (factual, ordinal) 

     ·  Interest in group activities (perception, ordinal)
     ·  Participation in village joint activities (factual, nominal)
     ·  Participation in village decision making (factual, nominal) 

        Knowledge on decision making process at a village level (perception, nominal) 

     ·  Benefits from joining group activities (perception, nominal) 

        Confidence to join decision making processes (composite, ordinal) 


     Cluster qfAwareness related indicators
     ·   Poor people's participation in extension activities (perception, ordinal)
     ·   Willingness to contribute for poor people's participation in extension (perception, ordinal)
     ·   Awareness of poor people (perception, nominal)
     ·   Women's participation in extension activities (perception, ordinal)
     ·   Willingness to contribute for women participation in extension (perception, ordinal)
     ·   Women's role in agriculture (perception, nominal)

     Table A.l summarizes the sampling approach used for the DAFEP performance evaluation process and
     the number of respondent households in each sample and for the two surveys.

     Sampling Methodology

     The DAFEP sample

     The choice of the appropriate sampling size was based on the decision to use income dispersion as the
     key variable whose variance was used for setting the sample size so that it is representative of the project
     population. With 30,000 households directly targeted by the project, and a 95% confidence, gave rise to
     a sample size of 370 randomly selected farmers. Due to possible "losses" throughout the project duration,
     the sample was increased to 450.

     However, a full random selection of households among project participants was likely to yield a widely
     dispersed, and therefore cost wise unmanageable, sample. Thus, a two-step process was used without
     loosing the degree ofconfidence (Deaton, 1997). This process consisted in randomly drawing first a number
     of villages, and then similarly, a number of households in these villages. Based on calculations (Salant and
     Dillman, 1994) a draw of 30 villages and 15 households per village satisfied at the same time confidence
     level requirements, equal distribution of village (three villages per participating province x 10 provinces)
     and a 450 households sampling. The field selection of villages was based on the identification of districts
     and related sub-districts were the DAFEP was planned to be implemented, and to select sub-districts



50   ANNEX 1. Methodology and Indicators
                                                        ~               AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA.
                                                              NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




that were the most representative of the district agro-ecological and socioeconomic conditions. 'Extreme'
sub-district situations were first discarded based on meetings with local key respondents and consultation
of local secondary data. Then, the sub-districts were randomly drawn. In each selected sub-district the
process was repeated for the village selection, discarding 'extreme' villages. At village level, respondent
households were randomly drawn using the list of registered DAFEP members. Replacement households
were also drawn in case of impossibility to find the corresponding households in the first list.

7he Reference sample

For the purpose of the "with and without" comparison, a Reference household sample of similar size and
characteristics was selected with the same method in non-DAFEP districts. The process for selecting these
households mirrored the process used for selecting DAFEP households. The main difference was that
the choice of districts, sub-districts and villages was conditioned by their similarities to the districts, sub
districts and villages in the DAFEP sample. Then, at village level, respondent households were randomly
selected from the list of village households, excluding households that were known to be completely non
farm households (for instance, pure traders or civil servants without any farm activity, including activities
of the spouse or dependents). With this process, differences between DAFEP and Reference households
were minimized as external heterogeneity due to agro-ecological and socioeconomic conditions was sought
to be reduced.

7he Spillover sample

In addition, CIRAD proposed the addition of a Spillover sample, in order to estimate whether the project
had alm generated indirect effects in implementation areas. The Spillover sample was built as a mix of
households not participating in DAFEP activities but located in areas where extension workers had been
trained to, and expected to apply, the DAFEP approach. This sample included three different situations
of non DAFEP households according to where they were located: a) in DAFEP villages, b) in non
DAFEP villages but still in DAFEP sub-districts, and c) in non DAFEP sub-districts but still in DAFEP
districts.




                                                                                  ANNEX 1. Methodology and Indicators   51
     AGRICULTURAL EXTtNSION SERVICES rN INDONESIA ·
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES
                                                         J

                                                              llentalion



                                                                                         Implementation
             IDistrict     Sub-
                          district
                                   Village Household
                                                     Sample  Noof
                                                      name Households
                                                                      TheolJ
                                                                                       Benchmark      EoP
                                               DAFEP    DAFEP       30xl5        450      480         360
                                    DAFEP       Non
                                                                    lOxl5    !

                          DAFEP                DAFEP
              DAFEP                  Non        Non
                                                       Spill-ove!   lOxl5        450      528         350
                                    DAFEP      DAFEP
                          Non   Non             Non
                                                                    lOxl5
                         DAFEP DAFEP           DAFEP
               Non   Non   Non                  Non
                                                       Reference    30xl5        450      480         357
              DAFEP DAFEP DAFEP                DAFEP




     Collecting data
     Data was collected at household level with the same interface forms used for data entry in the Access
     database where the Benchmark data was stored. This option was selected so as to limit the problem of data
     coding, a frequent source of errors. Supervisors in charge of each province were trained by Cirad staff and
     in turn they trained filed enumerators in each province. These five-to-six day training events enabled the
     participants to      familiar with the aim of the project, with the purpose of the survey, with the sampling
     method, with the interview techniques, and with the various forms. In addition, a special training was
     given to the staff in charge of operating computers for data entry and to the supervisors for quality control.
     All supervisors and operators did a pre-testing exercise under the supervision of the trainers to get used to
     the forms. They did also a pre-test with the enumerators before starting the field work. During the training
     of supervisors and enumerators the need to interview household members together and not only focusing
     on one respondent (usually the male active head of household) was emphasized. Therefore each survey unit
     consisted of a household and not a farmer.

     Data analysis
     The objective of data collection was to provide reliable material for DAFEP impact assessment in relation
     with specific indicators. The data analysis component was aimed at processing this data in order to perform
     this impact assessment. Since what matters is whether DAFEP had an impact, the key indicator in fact
     was the significance of a difference observed between the DAFEP and the Reference sample, difference
     being expressed for each indicator presented above, as the variation between the changes that occurred in
     the DAFEP sample and the changes that occurred in the Reference sample. This can be represented with
     formula (1) below as:




     where: 

     I x is the impact of the project in relation with the indicator X (I x can be true or false) 





52   Af\JNEX 1 Methodoogy and Indicators
                                                                           ~                   AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                                                  NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




Sig. is the result of the significance test

             is the difference in the terms expressed in the parentheses

             is the mean or median of the indicator X for the Dafep Sample in the EoP survey (and according
  ~(   )
             to the indices, for Reference sample; the Benchmark survey is referred to as After)

Statistical treatment of data thus differed according to the type of indicator and whether the samples were
considered as independent (for comparison of means and averages and dispersion, and for Before and After
comparison) or as dependent (for comparison of individual longitudinal data and for regression analysis).

The process of analysis included two steps. The first step consisted in conducting statistical work on each
indicator in order to assess the impact of the project. This step had two subcomponents: i) analysis of
quantitative indicators (see Figure 1), and ii) analysis of ordered (ordinal) and non-ordered (nominal)
qualitative indicators (see Figure 2). The output of this step was the identification of the indicators for
which it could be concluded that the project had a significant impact according to formula (1). 1be second
step consisted of multivariate analyses such as principal component and factorial analysis, applied to these
indicators in order to provide, whenever pOSSible, a more complete understanding of how this impact took
place and to what extend it was due to the project.

Statistl cal t rea/ment ofindividual indicators

Quantitative data (income, assets, yields, costs)
In the f'reparation of the data sets corresponding to each indicator, outlier25 identification was conducted
to eliminate unreliable data. Two methods were used. First, unreliable data was eliminated (for instance
yields that were impossible to obtain, or a share that is more than 100%). Alternatively percentile limits set
at 95% or 99% were used to identifY and eliminate extreme data that could influence or bias the results.

SAS software was used to conduct two different tests on the data sets. AT-test was used (with adjustment
to the error degree of freedom using Satterthwaite's formula) within each sample to assess whether the
situation After was significantly different from the situation BifOre. This test was selected since the After
sample~; are not independent form the BifOre samples due to the selected method of conducting the second
survey with the same households.

Then, Binary Logistic Regression Model (logit) was applied to test the significance of the means' difference
between DAFEP and Reference. For each model, the dependent variable was the membership of the
respondent household to the different samples and the independent variable was the indicator. Each
indicator was analysed separately. 1bis method uses the significance of the regression coefficient, estimated
with the maximum likelihood method, as a significance test of the differences observed between samples in
the inifal situation, in the final situation and ofthe difference as indicated in formula (1). Significant changes
in the latter indicate that the observed difference was related to the existence of the project; in other words




25 According to Iglewicz and Hoaglin (1993) outliers can be defined as observations that represent a discrepancy with the rest ofthe collected data

according to the investigator. Several methods can be used for identifYing and eliminating outliers in normally distributed data sets (Fallon and
Spada).lhe Box plot method (Tukey 1977) is a graphic method that does not include the extreme outliners in calculating the dispersion because
it is based on median and inter-quartile range calculation from which error limits are set at 5% and 95% confidence intervals.
  vVe had for instance the case of one household whose total non farm income represented 26% of the DAFEP sample total non farm income. It
turned out that the respondent household had borrowed and invested a huge amount of money for developing a cocoa trading business that year.




                                                                                                           . .NNEX I. \;lethocio:ogy and :,~d(ijtor5
                                                                                                           A                                           53
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:                 .....)
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




           Analysis of Quantitative Data (Mean and Median)                                                 the project had an impact27 ·

                                    Before           After         Difference                             In addition, tests were also
                                                                                      -                   carried out on the distribution
          DAFEP                                                                       r
                                                                                                          of the quantitative variables
          Reference                                                                                       using classic indicators such as
                                                                                                          skewness, kurtosis, and Gini
          Spillover                                                                                       coefficients. As there is no
                                       ~
                                                                       ,                  ·
                                                                                                          formal test to check whether the
                                                                                                          difference between Before and
                                   U U U                                                  5
                                                                                          ·
                                                                                          i
                                                                                                          After conditions are significant,

          Tests:
                                      .                .
                                                 ......·                                  ..
                                                                                          ·.........!:

                                                                                                          the Bootstrap method was used. 28

                                                 .
                                                 :
                                                       :                                                  The steps of the simulation
                                                                                                          were:
          1. Log it Test maximum likelihood: l:etween samples (with and without)                     I:   1. Re-sampling the data for
                                                                                                     :    each sample (Monte Carlo
      1_2_. _-v_e_s_t_Wl_·thin_·_s_am_l_e_s_{l:e_fo_Ie_an_d_after} _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _---'~...i
      .... T                         p                     ___                                            method)
                                                                                                          2. Compute the skewness and
                                                                                                          kurtosis of the variable at before
     and after condition for each sample
     3. Compare the skewness and the kurtosis of before and after condition
     4. Repeat 10.000 times steps 1- 3
     5. Count the situation where 'after'is less than 'before', and calculate the percentage. If the percentage is
     less than 0.05 or greater than 0.95 we conclude that they are significantly different.




     Figure 1. Statistical approachfor quantitative data




     27 Note that although the figures in the tables are sometimes presented with a       number of significant figures, this is not a reflection of the 

     precision of the estimates, merely the nature of the output of the software. 

     2' See for example Efron and Tibshirani 1993. 





54   ANNEX J. Methodology ana Indicators
                                                                             ~                      AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA.
                                                                                      NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




Coping with missing production data
At the time of the EoP field survey, more than 400 parcels, a non negligible share of the total number of
parcels, were cultivated but not yet harvested. The majority of these parcels are mainly cropped with rice
and to a lesser extent with maize and soybeans. As a result, cost data were collected but not production
data. This affected the value of several indicators, in particular agricultural net income per capita, yields,
total production value per ha, input use efficiency, trade income per capita.

This situation influenced the results in particular when comparing the Before and After results, since
at Benchmark data collection period those cases were almost non-existent. The following adjustments
were made in order to minimize the effect of the missing production data when comparing the results.
According to the type ofindicator, the adjustment process took different forms.

Act/ustmentsfor yield calculation. Three crops were concerned: rice, maize and soybeans. For coconut, there
was no missing data. The method for adjustment consisted in calculating a proxy for the expected yields
with the following procedure:
1.  Split DAFEP and Reference samples into two sub-samples, one without the missing parcels (SSI)
    and one with only the missing parcels (SS2).
1.  Calculate the new average yield in SSI for each of the three crops
2.  Calculate the input cost per ha (ICl) in SSI and input cost per ha (IC2) in SS2.
3.  If leI differs from IC2 by more than 10%, calculate the average yield for a subset of parcels in SSI
    centred on the value ofIC2. This calculation was made using a 10010 range from the centre value ofIC2. 29
4.  Use this yield to calculate the harvest for each parcel multiplying it by the cultivated area (this makes
    a new SS2 sub-sample)
5.  Use the new data to complete the sample by merging SSI and the new SS2 and recalculate the new
    proxy yield.
6.  Do the impact analysis with the recalculated yields.

Adjustment for agricultural income calculation. The agricultural income per capita cannot be recalculated
because the period of analysis is a one year period. Including an expected but virtual income would have
altered the consistency of the whole data set. Thus, this indicator is not used to assess the project impact
on this specific point. An alternative indicator, the crop net income per hectare, was thus established as
a proxy of project impact on income. The crop net income per hectare is calculated from crops for SSI,
followed by running comparisons of Before / After, and DAFEP/Reference. The same procedure was
applied to recalculate the trade net income per hectare. Another consequence was that the total net income
per capita was also to some extent affected by this situation. However, given that both Reference and
DAFEP samples were similarly affected, the difference in total net income indicator per capita was not
expected to be significantly affected. Furthermore, another indicator, the net yearly expenses per capita is
also a proxy of the total income and therefore analysis on income and welfare could be performed.

Adjustment for input use efficiency indicator. The input/output ratio (lOR) was calculated for rice maize
and soybeans after proceeding as for yield calculation adjustment. In addition the value of production using
the average price in the sample was calculated without missing data. For rice this approach is particularly
acceptable, since farm gate price of rice is determined by GoI floor price. 3o



2. This method was based on the hypothesis of a positive correlation between input use and output volume. The coefficient of correlation between
input costiha in rupiah and the yield in Kg/ha for the EoP survey, without the parcels not yet harvested is 0,89 for rice, 0,76 for maize and 0,40
for soybeans. This indicates that the hypothesis was verified for rice and maize.
    lhe H PP Inpres No. 131200.5 sets the floor price of paddy (Gabah Kering Panen) at Rp 1,730/kg.lhe median price of paddy in the three EoP
samples is Rp1.500/kg. Similarly, the price for maize was Rp1,200/kg and for soybean Rp2,700/kg.




                                                                                                              ANNEX 1 r'/etilodoiogy and Irldli~atcrc   55
- - - - - _ . _...    ---~---------                           ...   ~---   ...-   - -....- - -...   -~--    ...-   - -.... - - - - - - - 
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES
                                                              J

     Qualitative data
     Data is sorted into two categories, ordinal (numbered) and nominal data, For each ordinal indicator, the
     difference in the value Before and After was processed for each respondent. Ihis difference is classified into
     three categories: improvement (positive), stable (neutral) and worsening (negative), The testing of ordinal
     indicators consisted of measuring the difference between Before and After for each sample using a related
     sample sign test. Then, the difference in the change rate between samples was measured based on the
     different values of the indicators over the time period and using a chi-square homogenised proportion test,
     For nominal indicators, a representation of the variation in the distribution of respondents' answers was
     used. The estimates between Before and After conditions were based on two-samples proportion test. For
     some clusters a new synthetiC indicator (composite indicator) was also used with a weighted combination
     of ordinal indicators. Then, change and significance tests were conducted as indicated above for ordinal
     variables.


     Figure 2. Statistical approach for qualitative data


                          Analysis of Qualitative Data (Ordinal and Nominal)
                                                     Before        After      Difference
                                                                                                ,--
                         DAFEP(+ Y&W)
                                                                                                 -
                         Reference (+ Y &W)

                        Spillover (+ Y&W)                                                        ..
                                                                    "                              ·
                                                 U U U                                             i
                                                                                                   ·
                                                                                                   :
                         Tesls:
                                                   ·           ··ed
                                                                    :                              ·..................._!
                                                                                                   :
                                                               !
                         U::hi square test between samples for ordinal variables (with and without)                    :.!


                         2. Sample sign test within samples or two samples proportion test (before and after)
                                                                                                                       j




56   A.NNEX 1. Methodology and Indicators
                                                        ~               AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA.
                                                              NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES
                                                                                                                             ·




At the start of the project, DAFEP was planned to be implemented in 10 provinces. On this basis, the
sample was design to cover and represent the target group of 30000 households. However, activities were
cancelled in one province because the extension services were "re-structured" and disappeared as such. This
reduced also the size of the sample. There was also a "natural" erosion due to the impossibility in the EoP
survey to find all the households interviewed in the Benchmark survey. This case had been foreseen in the
project survey design and an erosion rate of 20% had been anticipated. The real erosion rate is more or
less 10%, mainly due to households that have moved and/or that the enumerators were unable to locate.
Thanks to the overestimation of the erosion rate, the size of each sample in the EoP survey was large
enough to carry out the statistical analysis with the expected confidence level.

Data quality and reliability: How reliable is the data ? There are clear limitations of the data. The first
limit is inherent to the type of work and to the collection of socioeconomic and agronomic data from
farm households. Collected data is not similar to data used in laboratory experiences or in field trials.
1V108t information comes from the recounting by respondents of facts that have occurred in a more or less
recent past, without the possibility to check its accuracy. In addition, many indicators proposed for the
assessment of the project were qualitative and some of them based on perceptions of fact, not even factual
ones with no way to measure their accuracy. Thus, accuracy and data inconsistency were the main problems
in this survey. Several methods were used to counter these.

4.36  A~ income was a central issue in the evaluation (the sampling rate was based on household income
      distribution), particular attention was paid to income data accuracy and inconsistency. For this
      purpose a household budget approach was used with on one hand the income flow and on the other
      hand the expenses flow. Data was collected independently for the two flows and a ± 10% match
      considered as acceptable over a one year period. The requested presence of all household members at
      the time of the interview was also a means to increase the reliability of data and in many cases proved
      to be necessary. Enumerators were requested to check consistency in income flows at the end of the
      interview and built-in queries were added in the database so as to automatically detect these.

4.37 1hus, it is considered that data is reliable with a ± 10% range and this although was true for the
     calculation ofsignificant differences. In fact, since what mattered in the evaluation was the significance
     of the differences and not the absolute values taken by each indicator, reliability of data was more
     a function of using similar methods and tools in the DAFEP and Reference sample than which
     method and which tools were used. As enumerators were assigned to perform both DAFEP and
     Reference sample survey, possible biases due to different teams assigned to different samples were
     eliminated.

The second limit was linked to two classic problems: outliers and missing data. For outliers, a median
based aDproach was used rather than a mean based approach. It is acknowledged that alternative methods
and approaches may be used the aim is to provide transparency on the methods used so that it can be
replicated and checked and alternative methods can be tested.

The third source of uncertainty is the respect of data collection protocol by the teams of enumerators and
supervisors. Feedback from the EoP survey team related to how data collection was performed during the
Benchmark indicates that there were some possible breaches in the data collection protocol. Cases were
mentioned where apparently respondents were not interviewed in their house and in per households, but
regrouped in one place. The selection of respondents in some place was not fully random and respondents
belonged to one farmer group (reference sample).



                                                                                  M'lNLX 1 fviethodoIG,s' anel          57
                                                                          "-.                 AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA.
                                                                                  NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




                                          Annex 2: Multivariate Analysis

This annex presents multivariate analysis applied to the indicators that have been identified as significant
in the main report. The objective is to provide further arguments to discuss the significance of the changes
earlier observed. It intends also to find out whether specific features of the DAFEP sample are related with
these changes in a causal way, in which case the impact of the project would be considered as even more
likely. This work is firstly conducted with factorial analysis for the whole set of significant performance
indicators, distinguishing qualitative and quantitative indicators. Then speCific correlation analysis
is conducted between significant indicators. It is not the purpose of this report to perform systematic
multivariate analysis of changes that have occurred between the Before and After situations if the latter are
not significant in the comparison across the DAFEP and Reference samplesY

Section A2.1 presents the results of the analysis conducted on the whole set of significant indicators and
section A2.2 has the results of the analysis for the specific indicators for which significance tests were
positive.

A2.1. hlCtorial Analysis

Quantitative indicators

Methodology
In this part of multivariate analysis, principal component analysis (PCA) and Biplot are applied to samples
from which multi-dimension outliers have been eliminated. Outliers were detected and removed using
the Mahalanobis distance method. For independent variables this is a measure of how much a case values
differ from the average of all cases. A large distance points out a case having extreme values for one or more
of the independent variables. The numbers of outliers detected with this method are displayed below:

Table A2.1. Outliers identified with Mahalanobis distance method for multivariate analysis


                                                    Before                                                     After
     Type of Outlier
                                  DAFEP             Spillover Reference                     DAFEP             Spillover Reference
     Extreme Outlier                  18                  21                20                  28                 22                32
     ''Usual'' Outlier                14                  14                15                  17                 10                23


After detecting the outliers, they were classified into three categories: not an outlier, usual outlier, and
extreme outlier. These categories were used as dummy variables in a regression analysis to see how much
they affected the variables used in the multivariate analyses. A low R-square value indicated that the
outlier's effect was not significant. The results pointed out that the extreme outliers have a more significant
effect (R-sq = 34% for Before and R-sq 40% for Mter) compared with the usual outliers (R-sq = 27% for
Before and R-sq = 35% for After). Then, dummy variables were regressed excluding the extreme outliers.
The results are R-sq 6% for Before and R-sq = 15% for After, showing that after excluding the extreme
outliers, usual outliers presence was non-significant. Among the extreme outliers, seven were common to
the Benchmark and EoP surveys.


31However, the authors in collaboration with the \Norld Bank plan to conduct further analysis on this data set and to present the results in other
media.




                                                                                                                                                     59
- - _ . _.....   __ _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -ANNC:X - Mutl'Janate- - 
                        ...                                          -- ---
                                                                            2.            Analysis
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA.         ,,)
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




     After elimination of extreme outliers, the data set was ready for a principal component analysis. This
     analysis is used to understand the covariance structure in the original variables and/or to create a smaller
     number of variables using this structure. Results of the PCA are displayed with Biplot, a way to present
     information on the characteristics of many objects in a 2D graph. With Biplot, it is possible to display
     the similarity of characteristics among objects (here each sample in each survey, so that there are six
     objects), the variance of variables (see the list of variable below), relations/ correlations among variables/
     characteristics and the main characteristics of each object. Two scaling methods were combined the
     correlation method and the distance method, in on columns centered and standardized correlation biplot
     representation. Figure 1 below synthesises this process.

     Figure 1. Process of multi-dimension outlier identification and removal




                                                           Boxplot

                                         Extreme Outlier     Outlier      Not an Outlier

                                                        Regression with
                                                       dummy variables


                                      If R2 is small                          IfR2 is big
                                      Keep Outliers                          Delete Outliers




     Results
     The results of PCA applied to a selected list of quantitative variables and indicators in each sample are
     presented in the Biplot figures 2 and 2 bis below. Variables are Type of sample (l=DAFEP; 2=Spillover;
     3=Reference); Age of the household head; Education level of the household head; Family size; Land area
     in ownership; Cultivated area; :Number of crop grown; YEC; AVC; SFE; NFIC; AB:NIC; AR:NIC;
     TIHA; TVIHA; CNIHA; ARNIC ; RiceYld; MaizeYld; SoybeanYld; IORrice; IORmz; IORsbn. The
     objects are the different types of sample while the vectors represent the variables.




60   ANNEX    Multivariate AnalYSIS
                                                      ~         AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                          NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES



Figure 2. Correlation biplot representation (columns centered and standardized) for selected
quantitative variables




                                         0.8



                                         0.6




                                                                 TVIHA




           -0.8    -0.6                                                          0.8
                                                                               Land Owned
                                                                 Cultivated Area




                                         ·0.4

                             Education

                                         -0.6




Figure 2bis. Extracted from Figure2.




                                                0.4
                                                                             ·   RS




                                                                             SFE            ·   DB




                                                                                            0.8




                                                                                       A.;mEX 2. MLiriva' ate A.naiysls   61
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES
                                                      J


     Ibe characteristics of a correlation Biplot are as follows:
     ¢ Correlation between variables is represented by the cosinus angle of two factors. If the correlation is
                                                                                    0
        positive, the two vectors form an angle that is <90°, i f negative it is >90 and if the correlation is 0 the
                         0
        angle is _90
     ¢   The variance is equivalent to the length of the vector; the longer the length, the higher the variance.
     ¢   Object Characteristics: two objects with similar characteristics will be shown as tvvo dots close to each
         other; if an object and variable vector are in the same space (close to each other) the closest vectors
         indicates the characteristic of the object.
     ¢   The distance between objects (samples) is a proxy of their Mahalanobis distance in the multidimen
         sional space.

     Most correlations are pOSItive and some are very strong (the more acute the angle the stronger the
     correlation). Most income and welfare variables are strongly correlated except ANIC with ABNIC and
     NFIC. 1he proximity ofYEC and TNIC confirms that YEC is a good proxy for the total net household
     income per capita. As the length of the line that links a variable point to the graph's origin represents its
     contribution in this space, we can see that most of the characteristics of the sample are explained by welfare
     and income indicators. However, the projection of the objects coordinates to these vectors indicates a rather
     large homogeneity among the samples in the Benchmark survey and among samples in the EoP survey.
     This result confirms the trend in the statistical analysis. Samples were very close in their characteristics
     before the project and remain so after. It confirms also the importance of the change (positive) in relation
     with NFIC for both DAFEP and Reference samples between Before and Mter and the relative decline of
     ANIC and other variables that are related to agriculture (number of crops harvested, TVIHA, CNIHA,
     TIHA, Rice, Soybean and Maize Yield, and cultivated area) have relatively decreased.

     Qualitative indicators

     Methodology
     Factor analysis is used to identifY underlying variables, or factors, that explain the pattern of correlations
     within the set of observed variables. As indicated in table A2.2 eight components explain more than 75%
     of the total variance. A rotated component matrix highlights which indicators mostly contribute to each of
     these components as displayed in table A2.3 where, for example, factor 1 represents ind-19 (Accessibility
     to extension workers), factor 2 represents ind-14 (Interest in group activities)




62   ANNEX 2. Multlv2r1ate Ana:ysis
                                                                   ""-                  AGRICU~TURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                                             NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




Table A2.2. Total Variance Explained

  Component                        Initial Eigenvalues
                    Total          % of Variance          Cumulative %
  1                       2.449                18.840           18.840
  2                       1.407                10.822           29.662
  3                       1.184                 9.107           38.769
  4                       1.098                 8.446           47.215
  5                       1.046                 8.046           55.261
  6                        .966                 7.430           62.690
  7                        .928                 7.139           69.830
  8                        .866                 6.665           76.494
  9                        .842                 6.474           82.969
  10                       .780                 6.003           88.971
  11                       .738                 5.677           94.648
  12                       .380                 2.919           97.567
  13                       .316                 2.433          100.000

Extraction Afethod' Principal Component Analysis.


Table J\2.3. Rotated Component Matrix (a)

                                                                  Component
               1                  2               3             4               5               6                7              8
ind-19             .942            -.067              -.030      -.097              -.018           .009          -.077          -.042
ind-14          -.071              .926               .087        .012              .082            .033           .039            .056
ind-8           -.029              .076               .985        .000              .070            .073           .031            .028
Ind-23          -.086              .010               .000        .991              -.027         -.044            .028            .028
ind-16          -.018              .071               .070       -.027              .984            .035           .040            .070
ind-11             .006            .029               .071       -.044              .035            .991          -.050            .036
Ind-27          -.066              .031               .030        .028              .039          -.050            .993            .041
ind-18          -.038              .047               .028        .028              .068            .036           .042            .990
Ind-24          -.031              .02~               .024        .017              .065            .009           .014            .068
Ind-26          -.008              .004               .008       -.003              -.025           .010          -.017           .002    1




ind-41          -.010              .009               .007       -.024              .030            .022          -.012            .000
ind-13          -.065              .351 :             .095        .001              .070            .050          -.001           .042
ind-20          -.329              .090    i          .084        .096   i          .069            .054           .011           .034


The variables selected for further correspondence analysis are thus:
ind-19 : Accessibility to extension workers
ind-14 : Interest in group activities
ind-8 : Participation in Village Decision Making
ind-23 : Barriers of access to input markets
ind-16 : Accessibility of agriculture information
ind-ll : People's desire to participate in decision making process at a village level
Ind-27 : Joint marketing of outputs/agriculture commodities
ind-18 : Willingness to pay for agriculture information




                                                                                                           ANNEX 2. Mdtlvanale AnalySIS       63
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVCES IN INDONESIA.   ....)
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




     1he next step was to conduct a multiple correspondence analysis and represent the results on a graph.
     In Figure 4, the square dots represent the values taken by the selected indicators and triangular dots
     represent the various samples (12 samples in this case after separating household respondents from Y&W
     respondents).

     lnterpretation
     When samples and indicators values are close it means that these values are associated with the sample.
     Based on this, in the multiple correspondence analysis graph displayed in figure 3, we can differentiate
     two main clusters: the Benchmark cluster and the EoP cluster. This confirms that there is generally a
     Significant difference for many of the key qualitative indicators between the Before and After situation.
     The Benchmark (Before) cluster is characterized by the following respondents' perception: having easily
     access to extension workers, often having barriers to input market, participating in group activities for
     between 1 and 5 years, and having no desire to join in village decision making.

     The EoP (After)cluster is characterized by the following respondents' perception: having no barriers to
     input market, having sufficient access to agriculture information, being a member of group activity for
     more than five (a logical result since this survey was conducted five years later) and having the desire to
     join in village decision making.

     As indicated by the arrows, the direction of the evolution (the After cluster has moved to a position closer
     to improved values for many variables) is rather positive with the exception of access to extension workers
     but it is compensated by improved access to agriculture information. However, these changes occur again
     between the Before and After surveys, not across sample (Reference versus DAFEP).




64   ANNEX 2. Multivariate Analysis
                                                                                          "-.                        AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA.
                                                                                                   NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES



Figure 3. Representation of multiple correspondence analysis results


                                                                                      I
                                                                                      I
                                                                                      I
                                                                                      I
                                                                                      I
                                                                                      I                                                           22
                                                                                      I
                                                                                      I                                             ····
                                                                                                                                           ····    ·
                                                                                      I                                   ......
                            1                                                         I                              ..... 

                                                                                      I                         ····· 

                                                                                      I                 ·· f!   

                                                    &F                                I       "t~'          ·
                                                    ...       R-F ~'i".
                                                                                 ~\)o·t···
                                                                                      I ·
                                                                                              .(
                   +-'
                                            ...2i..A .'--."· I: ·                     I·           11
                                                                                                                                             16
                    C
                    Q)
                                                                           \.
                                                                           II>
                                                                                      I
                                                                                      I
                                                                                                                                              ·
                    c
                                                                    /9\               :
                    8.                                                                    4

                    E o           ---------~-~~~-             · 1
                                                                      -    · ·
                                                                                 --~--------------~R_F----------
                                                                                      I.

                    o                                         5-.1,.5                                                          ..
                   ()                                         ·     '..           ·   t
                                                7                     -:         ~\   I   1
                                                ·
                                                                        :;!~5
                                                                     19\1
                                                                                                                           · 1

                                                                     .. i                               ...                    A-&F
                                                          6
                                                                                      ~-D-Y&W
                                                          ·                       \:  I
                                                                                           10
                           -1 

                                                                                              ·



                                      -1                                              o                                             1
                                                                            ComjDnent1

Note:
B-D F j, BefOl'e DA FEP farmer (household)                                       B-D-Y&\V is Before DAFEP youth and women sample
B-R-F is Before Reference farmer (household)                                     B- R -Y&\V is Before Reference youth and women sample
B-S-F is Befort' Spillover farmer (household)                                    A-S-Y&VV is Before Spillover youth and women sample
A-D-F ii After DAFEP farmer (household)                                          A-D-Y&\Vis After DAFEP youth and women sample
A-R-F if Mter Reference farmer (household)                                       A-R-Y&VV is After Reference youth and women sample
A-S- F is After Spillover farmer (household)                                     A-S-Y&Vvis After Spillover youth and women sample


1 ;:-.!O barriers to input market         2 Sometimes barriers to input market            3 Often have barriers to input market
4 No jont marketing                       5 Joint marketing (0-2 years)                   6 Joint marketing (3-5 years)
7 Joint marketing (>5 years)               8 No access to agriculture information         9 Lack of access to agriculture information
10 Sufficient access to agriculture information                       11 Not willing to pay for agriculture information
12 Willing to pay for agriculture information                         13 Easy access to extension worker
14 Accessibility to extension worker is average                       15 Hard to access to extension worker
16 No respond to accessibility to extension worker                    17 No participation in village decision making
18 Not to Active in village decision making                           19 Active in village decision making
20 No desire to join in village decision making                      21 Desire to join in village decision making
22 Not a member of group activity                                     23 Member of group activity (0-2 years)
24 Member of group activity         years)                           25 Member of group activity (>5 years)




                                                                                                                                              M,i\IEX   iVlu!tlv3nate Analys.s   65
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES
                                                                   ...J

                                                                       !Catol'S
     The results of the significance tests applied to the performance indicators are summarized below cluster by
     cluster, and corresponding hypothesis and multivariate analysis method are indicated.


     The significance analysis shows that Reference households have performed better than DAFEP households
     with respects to agriculture related net income per capita (ARNIC) and within this category agribusiness
     net income per capita (ABNIC). Conversely, positive changes in non farm net income per capita (NFIC),
     yearly expenses per capita (YEC) and asset value per capita (AVe) are significantly higher for the DAFEP
     sample compared to the Reference sample.

     We firstly examined whether a change in the number of household members could explain the differences
     observed, since all these indicators are calculated per capita. The results are presented in table A2A.

     Table A2A. Value and significance of correlations between family size and selected per capita indicators
                                       Sample                    YEC           AVC     NFIC      ARNIC
                                  Dafep Before               -0.3*             -0.2*    -0.2*     -0.1
                                  Dafep After                -0.2*             -0.3*    -0.2*      0.0
                                  Reference Before           -0.3*             -0.3*    -0.1 *   -0.1 *
                                  Reference After            -0.3*             -0.3*    -0.2*     -0.1
                                · Spillover Before           -0.3*             -0.3*    -0.2*    -0.1 *
                                I
                                . Spillover After            -0.3*             -0.2*    -0.2*    -0.1 *
                                'Significant (2-tailed)
     Interpretation
     There is a correlation between the size of the family and TEC, AVC and NFIC for all samples in both
     Benchmark and EoP surveys. For ARNIC the correlations are not always significant. However, since
     the values of the correlation coefficient are all very low «0,3), it is likely that other factors explain the
     observations.

     Decomposition ofsign!ficant income and welfare indicators
     Agriculture-related net income per capita (ARNIe)
     In table A2.5 is displayed the share of households earning an income from agriculture related activities
     and then the share of its three components, respectively agro processing (ABNIC), renting of production
     factors (RPFC) and selling labour force (LF).

     Table A2.5. Decomposition of ARNIC and correlations with its constituents

                                              ABNIC                               RPFC                      LF
                Decomposition
                                          Before  After                Before         After        Before        After   I
                     DAFEP                  27%           45%           24%            21%           49%         34%     .

                    Spillover               19%           38%           26%            23%           55%         39%
                    Reference               18%           41%           29%            25%           53%         34%     !

                                              ABNIC                               RPFC                      LF
                   Correlation
                                          Before  After                Before         After        Before        After
                     DAFEP                   0.6*         0.9*          0.3*           0.3*          0.6*        0.4*
                    Spillover                0.8*         0.9*          0.4*           0.3*          0.4*         0.1
                    Reference                0.7*         0.9*          0.5            0.3*          0.3*         0.1
             'Significant (2-tailed)




66   ANNEX 2. Multivariate AnalYSiS
                                                            '".1-'$   "Ii"   .J   hud    !t1 .    ·   n



                                                           \...                                  AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA.
                                                                        NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




Interpt'etati on
The results indicate that in all samples the percentage of households with income from agriculture related
activities has increased. This increase is characterised by a drop in the relative weight of selling labour
force as source of income and the surge in agro processing. This is particularly true for the Reference
sample where the earlier analysis had highlighted the weight of this source ofincome in agriculture related
income.

The correlations between ARNIC and its components confirms that ABNIC is the main factor explaining
the observed trend and that the two other factors get less correlated with ARNIC in the EoP sample.

Analysis ofNon Farm Net Income per Capita
In table A2.6 is displayed the share of households with a non farm income and then its four different
sources, respectively non farm jobs (NF]C), sale of assets (SOAC), financial transactions (FTC) and
remittances (Rl\IIC).

Table A2.6. Decomposition ofNFIC and correlations with its constituents

                         NFIC               NFJC           SOAC                              FTC                           RMC
     Sample
                     Before After       Before After    Before After                     Before After                  Before After
    DAFEP                   77%   94%     61%    49%      11%                 12%                 23%        21%              4%      18%
    Spillover               74%   95%     61%    52%       9%                  9%                 23%        20%              7%      19%
    Reference               75%   94%     59%    48%       9%                 11%                 22%        22%              8%      18%
                                            NFJC           SOAC                              FTC                           RMC
     Sample
                                        Before After    Before After                     Before After                  Before After
    DAFEP                                 0.6*   0.1*     0.5*                     0.1                0.6*   0.98*             0.1     0.04
    Spillover                             0.5*   0.8*     0.6*                    0.2*                0.6*    0.5*             0.1     0.2*
    Reterence                             0.8*   0.7*     0.1*                    0.4*                0.8*    0.6*            0.3*     0.2*
  'Significant I)-tailed)



Interpret;Jtion
In all samples the percentage of households with non farm income has drastically increased reaching 95%
(NFIC column represent the share of households with NFIC income). The structure of non farm income
remains stable as far as cash flow aspects (little change in SOAC) and financial transactions within the
households (little changes in FTC) are concerned. However, the relative share of remittances and other
subsi&es have gained importance. These results indicate that these households become more dependent
from external sources of income while the share of purely non-farm household activities has decreased.
This trend is similar for all sample but more accentuated in the case of the DAFEP sample since the
Before situation of RMC was lower. The correlations are more difficult to explain. Non farm jobs income
is strongly correlated with all samples before but very loosely with DAFEP after, while there is a stronger
correlation with financial transactions in the EoP samples. Remittances are not strongly correlated with
NFIC.

Ana{y.5is o.fAsset Value per Capita
In table A2.7 the structure and evolution of assets using five main categories whose share is represented
through the estimates of their monetary value with regards to total asset value is presented. These are
respectively animal assets (AA), AgriEquipment (AE), House&Furniture (HF), Transportation Means
(TM), and Capital Savings (CS).




                                                                                                                     ANNt:X     Multivariate Analysis   67
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA.                            ",,)
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




     Table A2.7. Decomposition ofAVC and correlations with its constituents

      I Decomposition                     AA                           AE                     HF                       TM                        CS              I
                                Before           After        Before          After     Before      After      Before        After       Before          After
                      DAFEP           18%              9%            5%         4%        70%        76%             7%       10%             0,0%       0,1%    J
                  Spillover           13%          10%               6%         5%           74%     76%             7%          9%           0,0%       0,3%
                Rererence             16%          10%               5%         5%        72%        75%             8%          9%           0,2%       0,2% I
           Correlation                    AA                           AE                      HF                      TM                         CS
                                Before           After        Before          After     Before      After      Before        After      Before           After·
                      DAFEP           0.37'"      0.23*             0.42*     0.61*      0.9}*       0.92*       0.43*       0.66*            -0.04       0.13
                  Spillover           0.23*       0.12*             0.09       0.07      0.99"       0.99"       0.60*       0.17'"           -0.03         -0
                Rererence             0.92"       0.24"             0.09      0.17*      0.84"       0.96*       0.88"       0.41*            -0.02       0.04

     *Significant (2-tailed)


     In all samples house and furniture represent more than 70% of the assets both Before and After conditions.
     The weight of animal assets has rather strongly dropped in the DAFEP and Reference. This may be
     interpreted as a change in the consumption patterns of the household and in their accumulation strategy.
     With higher income the needs for savings through animals has decreased and households acquire more
     consumption goods. The correlations confirm this trend with a decline in the association between assets
     and animals in the After samples while the correlation get stronger with house and furniture.

     Analysis ~fYearly Expenses per Capita (VEC)
     In table A2.8 we present the structure and evolution of yearly expenses per capita using six main categories
     whose share is represented through the estimates of their monetary value with regards with total expenses
     value. These are respectively, food consumption (FC), non food routine consumption (NFR), education
     costs (EC), social expenses and transfers, asset acquisition (AA) and financial transactions (FT).

     Table A2.8. Decomposition ofYEC and correlations with its constituents

                                        FC                      NFR                     EC                SC                   AA                      FT            I
          Decomposition
                               Before After             Before        After    Before    After      Before     After      Before After          Before     After
          DAFEP                 36%            31%          31%        34%       5%       6%         7%         8%         11%        12%        10%         9% I
      !
          Spillover             36%            32%          33%        35%       5%       6%         7%         8%          9%        11%        10%         9% I

          Rererence             36%            32%       31%           33%       5%       6%         7%        8%          11%        11%        10%        10% I
                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                        FC                      NFR                     EC                SC                   AA                      FT
           Correlation
      :
                               Before After             Before        After    Before After         Before     After      Before After          Before After
      !
          DAFEP                 0.49*          0.18*        0.59*     0.22"     0.29*    0.03"      0.53*      0.11"      0.80*       0.37"      0.55"      0.94"
          Spillover             0.46*          0.48"     0.64"        0.58*     0.27*    0.41"      0.37*      0.42"      0.78"       0.73"      0.59"      0.67"
          Reference             0.53"          0.63*        0.51*     0.66"     0.18"    0.26"      0.30"      0.41"      0.77'"      0.72"      0.68"      0.57'"


     Interpretation
     In all samples the trend is that monetary non food routine expenses are progressively taking over monetary
     food expenses. This indicates some improvement in general welfare level; however, as education expenses




68   ANNEX    MullivJllale An3iYs,s
                                                        ~                AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                               NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




and assets acquisition remain stable, this improvement does not translate into an accumulation process or
a long term strategy. Transfers from the households are limited and confirm that the net flow of transfer
is positive towards the rural households.

Deepening the analysis ofwelfare distribution
As indicated earlier, while AVC in the DAFEP sample is significantly higher than in the reference sample,
AVC distribution in the EoP survey is significantly different than in the reference sample, showing a
higher level of inequality. In order to better understand this situation, we split the DAFEP sample into
two sub,amples of the same size using the median value ofA VC in the EoP sample. A correlation analysis
was run for the variables displayed in Table A2.9. Figure 4 plots the variations in asset value per capita
between the Benchmark sample and the EoP sample against the variation in non farm net income per
capita £)r the two subsamples (called "Upper Stata" and "Lower Strata").

Table A2.9. Correlation coefficients between AVC and NFIC for DAFEP upper and lower strata


                   UPPER       AVC-l     AVC-2     Dif AVC     NFIC-l    NFIC-2      DifNFIC
                AVC-l             1,00
                AVC-2             0,14      1,00
               DifAVC            -0,21      0,94        1,00
                NFIC-l            0,29      0,07       -0,03      1,00
                NFIC-2            0,20      0,23        0,16      0,28       1,00
               I-
               DifNFIC           -0,05      0,16        0,17     -0,52       0,68          1,00
                  LOWER        AVC-l     AVC-2     Dif AVC     NFIC-l    NFIC-2      DifNFIC
                AVC-l                1
               I
                AVC-2             0,19      1,00
                DifAVC           -0,95      0,14        1,00
                NFIC-l            0,18     -0,06       -0,21
                                                                  1;
                NFIC-2            0,16      0,17       -0,10      0,16       1,00
                DifNFIC           0,03      0,19        0,03     -0,45       0,81          1,00
              Note: 1 and 2 refer respectively to Benchmark and EoP surveys.

The results show that there is no significant correlation between the variation in asset value per capita and
the variation in non farm income (0,17 and 0,03 respectively for Upper and Lower Strata). The difference
in AVe is strongly positively correlated (0,95) with the level of asset in the 2006 for the Upper strata while
it is strongly negatively correlated (-0,94) with the level of assets in 2001 in asset value per capita for the
lower strata.

Figure 11 shows that in the higher strata, an increase in non farm in come is more often linked with
an increase in asset value, while in the lower strata the two elements are almost completely de-linked.
Furthermore, the trend in the lower strata is a de-capitalization of assets in value (deflated) while there is
a capit<llization in the upper strata. Lower strata households do not use their additional non farm income
for accumulation, but for direct consumption purpose. This in turn leads to a depreciation of their asset
values. As a result inequality in Ave distribution has increased as earlier indicated.




                                                                                          A\lNEX 2. Multivariate AnalySIS   69
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA.
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES
                                                                                        ..J

     Figure 4. Difference in AVC against difference in NFIC for higher and lower strata


                                                                                    Higher Strata
                                                                       40000000

                                                                                                           Variation in Assets Value

                                                                       3OCOOOOO
                                                                                                                                                        ·
                                                                       20000000
                                                                                                                                       ·
                                                                          ·
                                                                              ·                 · +·   ·
                                                                       1't1000000
                                                                                    ·· · ·
                                                                                  · . . . ···· ··                   ·
                                                                                                                    +···
                                           ·                        +  1Iot\/Jt!"')j··        ..                                       ·
                                                                       "~~.~'"v. -······
                                                                 · ". :r..~" ...20000~ ·
                                                      .+
                                                                                        :~...
                                                                                                                         +    ·
                                                                                                                                                            ·
                              , -4000000   ·3000000   -2000000          +
                                                                  .; 000000 +1liOr/xl1t
                                                                                    0   :                                   3000000    4000000       5000000        6000000
                                                                              ·             +




                                                                                    Lower Strata
                                                                       40000000

                                                                                                           Variation in Assets Value

                                                                       30000000



                                                                       20000000



                                                                       10000000



                                                           · · · ·(.~.M~···                                             _                  ·
                                                                               "'''~o~cxt ~oo. 3i&0~
                                                                  -~OOOO()(1 . .
                              ·4000000     ·3000000
                                               ·
                                                      2000000.
                                                                  .
                                                                 ··            ··
                                                                              "..
                                                                       -10000000. ·
                                                                                                   ·
                                                                                                                ·
                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                       4(¥JOOOO      5000000        6000000
                                                                                                                                           Variation in N.:.m farmlllC(lfl'l?




                                                         7he Productivity and technology cluster
     The only significant differences observed are for soybean yield and in input efficiency for rice where DAFEP
     sample households improved much more than in the Reference sample.

     Analysis ofSoybean Yield in the DAFEP sample
     Given that soybean is very sensitive to local conditions, hypotheses related to the following points were
     tested for the corresponding households: location of the respondent households, level of input use, type of
     variety, cultivated area, type ofland, and tenure status

     Correlation analysis was used for the numeric and ordinal variables and association analysis for nominal
     and ordinal data. For association analysis a 4-category variable was created based on quartile distribution.
     There were no outliers found before conducting this analysis; the sample consist of 57 parcels owned by 26
     respondents in the Benchmark sample and 12 respondents in the EoP sample.

     The correlation for yield with cultivated area is negative (-0.74) but not significant while the correlation
     between yield and total input is positive but weak (+0.22) and significant only at 10% level. The results
     of association analysis show only a significant association between yield and the type of variety but this
     association is weak.




70   ANNEX 2 [v1tJtlvanate AnalYSIS
                                                         "-.            AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                               NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




Ana/pis oj input efficiency/orpaddy in DAFEP Sample
For rice input efficiency (measured by the input/output ratio), included in the analysis are the following
variables: variety, cost of physical inputs, gross harvest, type of land, tenure status, JPAI and JMAO.

The method is similar to the analysis of soybean. There were 4 outliers found and the sample consists
of 1060 parcels owned by 569 respondents in the Benchmark sample and 491 respondents in the EoP
sample.

The correlation between lOR and yield and total cost of input/ha is weakly negative though significant
(-0.07 and -0.11). This result is logical for the yield (higher yield means higher output, thus lowering the
lOR ratio) but more surprising for input use. This indicates either that there is no response to higher
input use or that another variable (such as the price ofinputs) plays also a role. Ideally, input use should be
represented by the physical quantities, but since there is a large range ofvarious input used by farmers this
is not included in this analysis in the report. In the association analysis, there is a weak association between
the type ofvariety with lOR and only at 10% leveL

Significant /l1(ome and welfare indicators and extension indicators
Finally, a correlation analysis was included between the two indicators found significant in the extension
cluster (JPAI andJMAO) and the significant income and welfare indicators (YEC, AVC, NFIC, ABNIC,
and ARNIC) so as to clarify whether there was a possible interaction within the DAFEP sample that
could help understand why these indicators differ. The results are in Table Using Mahalanobis distance
method we eliminated extreme outliers and found the results as indicated in table A2.10.

Table A2.10. Correlation coefficients between JMAO, JPAI and income/welfare indicators

                            YEC              NFIC     ABNIC      ARNIC     }MAO       )pAl
                  }MAO      -0.04            -0.05·   -0.01      0.00      1
                                                                 0.01                 1



Interpretatioll
The only significant and somehow strong correlation is betweenJMAO andJPAI (0.5 4). Other correlations
are either non significant or weak. There is no related effect between the changes that occurred in the
significant extension variables and with the income and welfare variable in the DAFEP sample.




                                                                                          ANNEX 2. Multivariate Analysis   71
                                                                                f t




                                                        "'-             AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                              NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




                  Annex 3: Farmer Managed Activity Interventions

The project provided the opportunity for bottom-up participatory planning and implementation of FMA
activities, which provided 'learning by doing' opportunities to groups offarmers in the participating villages.
The ICR mission during field visits to Bantul, Kulon Progo, Magelang, Gowa and Kupong districts has
documented several successful interventions which have provided significant financial returns to the farmers
(Table 1). 'lbere is a large variation in financial returns and investment costs showing wide variation in
adoption rates and equity considerations (numbers of poorer benefiting households and gender).

There were a number of high income generating high cost activities like orchids, gurmi fish and coconut
jelly, to which large proportions of the FMA budgets have been allocated and which benefited very few
farm families in the participating villages. High investment!operating cost and!or gestation period of these
activities restricted their adoption to only few better-off households who actually received the training. On
the other-hand there were other low cost key interventions with as little as 3 to 7% of the village Fl\1A
budget being allocated to them for improving the skills of farmers which have benefited many families
particularly the poorer ones. Examples include duck raising, catfish, bitter gourd, citrus, cattle fattening
and local chicken improvement which proved to be popular and financially viable as seen by their spread
from 16 to over 50% of the farmers in the villages concerned ..

Case st u~y ?m Hples of /~jUA intervelltio/1J
Financial analysis was carried out by the FAO ICR mission of a number of interventions adopted by farm
househ)lds that participated in FMA activities through DAFEP (Table 1). The analysis is based on data
obtained in focus discussions with farmers during village visits by the mission.
Targeting villages is just as critical as targeting resource poor farmers for achieving significant impact on
poverty reduction. Most of the villages visited by the mission, with the exception of Kupang, are endowed
with better resources. Within the village also, FMA interventions could have been better targeted to
maximize the beneficial impact per unit of budget spent. One good example observed during the ICR
mission's field visit to an interior location, Pallantikang Village (UPKG) in the sub-district ofPattallassang
in Gowa district. lbis village is far away from the district headquarters with poor roads. The farmers here
identified a training activity for building up a partnership with the help of an outside expert and utilized
an FMA grant of Rp 2.3m (3% of the Fl\1A budget). A total of 30 men and 20 women/youth attended
this training. which led to the development of several partnerships between 2003-2005. Each of the seven
farmer groups entered in to an MOU with entrepreneurs located in Makassar for marketing corn, tapioca
and paddy directly instead of going through middlemen as was the case before DAFEP. Price realized
net of transport charges, for paddy and cassava are 33 to 80% more than before, while the price advantage
for maize has been between 10-40%. As of now, around 800 farmers from this and neighboring non
DAFEP villages are estimated to have been benefited through these partnerships, each getting Rp 0.5
to 0.8 million incremental net benefits per year. More importantly, these groups are now looking for
developing new partnerships for getting access to credit linked input supply for improving their farm
business opportunities.

Technology transfer for better rearing oflocal chicken in Sendangsari UPKG in Bantu! is a good example
of how even with a modest budget, cost effective extension related farmers' capacity building activities
could lead to significant improvement in individual as well as societal welfare .. Just by training farmers to
carry out a very simple and easy management practice ofseparating a hen from its chicken, each farm family
who adopted this technique is earning an additional income of Rp 1.35m per year and the technology has
spread to more than 50% of the farmers in the village. On the other hand, another FMA activity in the
same village for the processing of spices, despite being highly profitable by getting additional income of



                                                                        ANNEX 3. Farmer Managed Activity interventIOns   73
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:   ",,)
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSLIES



     Rp 0.027m for every kg of spices processed, the spread of this technology was limited to the group of 26
     women who received training during tvro consecutive years. Such monopolization of skills acquired by
     the FMA training was also observed in the case of orchids with respect to another group in Magelang
     district where the benefits from almost 30% of the total FMA grant allocated to a village with 727 farm
     households was captured by a group of 25 better-off women who received training over three consecutive
     years contributing themselves 29% of their training and setup costs to start their group operation and
     there has been no spread to any other households in their village. These varied experiences observed in the
     project villages highlights the need for strengthening farmer groups and FETs (i) in identifying low cdst
     highly profitable interventions and Oi) to ensure equitable distribution of benefits from FMA interventions
     for reaching more farmers, including the poorer households within and across villages.

     Aside from equity concerns, clearly financial returns from typical interventions that families have been able
     to implement following training received through DAFEP have been very attractive and have substantially
     raised family incomes. The mission analyzed a variety of 16 such interventions - these are presented in the
     following Table. FlVIA activities were classified into (i) those requiring capital investment and (ii) those
     requiring only additional operating expenses. For the type (i) activities net benefit to incremental costs
     (investment plus operating costs) range from 1.4 to 33.1 indicating that for every additional Rpl spent
     Rp2.4 to Rp34.1 are returned. For type (ii) activities net benefit to incremental operating costs range
     from 1.3 to 15.7 so that for every additional Rpl spent Rp2.3 to Rp16.7 are generated. Expressed as a
     percentage return to additional cost, these range for type (i) from 40% to 3210% and for type (ii) from 30%
     to 1470%.




74   ANNEX 3, Farmer Managed Actv!ty Interventions
                                                                      "'-.                 AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                                                NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES



Table 1: Financial Analysis of sample FMA interventions in DAFEP villages

i Name of the               Benefits provided under FMA                I   Fanners :    Training           : Net            Net benefit
  activity                                                                 benefited    budget for           benefit to     to                I
                                                                           as % of      activity as %        operating      annualized        I
                                                                           village      ofFMA                cost ratio   I investment
                                                                           fanners      budget                              ratio II
  Cat fish raising ~hnOlOgy transfer; Fanner trainings                     17%          3.5%                    0.73              2.5         I

                        nursery raisinJl; and cat fish raising                                                            I

  Gunni fish        Technology transfer; Apprenticeship;                   12%          24%                      2.1             8.6
  raising           Potential assessment; Business
                    meeting, and tour                                                                                     I
  Duck raising      Technology transfer; Study tour;                       16%          7%                       2.9             4.2
                    Networking for duck raising & golden
                    snail pest as feed
  Orchid            Technology transfer; Apprenticeship;                   3.4%         28.5%                    1.0             7.7
  cultivation       Tour; Comparative study; Field school
                    meeting
  Cultivation of    Field school and technology transfer                   27%      1   4 .7%                    3.0             7.5
  Bittergourd
  Coconut Jelly     Technology transfer; Apprenticeship                    0.4%         6.4%                     1.3             12.5
  proces:>ing       and Study tour
  Citrus            Technology transfer; and training                      31%          3.1%                     6.8             33.1
  cultivation       organized in collaboration with pest
                    management school
                    Apprenticeship program for technology                  9.2%         4.1%                    15.0              1.4
I Pruldy
  Threshers         transfer to make indigenous wooden
                    thrasher
i Partnership       External expertise provided training on                100%         3.1%                     NA              NA
  building          partnership activities                                                                 I
c~~ning growth and weight gain-enabling two
                    Training for technology transfer-faster                27%          4.7%
                                                                                                                 2.2             NA
                    cycles in 2 years                                                                                                         I
! Impro, cd paddy   Rainfed paddy field school                             8%           3.1%                                                  I
                                                                                                                 2.2             NA
     technol~                                                                                                                                 I

  Bamboo                    Demonstration and supervision by               15%          NA                      15.7
  handcraft for             invited artisan.                                                                                     NA
  youth                                                                                                                                       I
  Impro,ed cattle           Technology transfer and training               100%         NA                       2.8              1.9
  by breedingl
  ration
  fonnulation                                                                       I                                                         I
I Local Chicken             Technology transfer for better rearing         More       4%                         9.0             9.0
                            increased stocking and production              than
                                                                                    I
                                                                           50%                                            I
     Proces;;ing of       Technology transfer for spices                   Less than 14.5%                       2.1             NA
     Spices for value   I processing in 2002 and field meeting             1%
     addition             for spice crops cultivation in 2003
     Rambutan             Technology transfer and training                 75%          13%                     NA               NA
     selection,
     budding and
     production         I

11Annualized investment cost is estimated based on 10% interest rate and 3 to 5 years of repayment period wherever appropriate; NA for Not
available/applicable




                                                                                             ANNEX 3. Farmer Managed Activity Interventions       75
                                                        ~               AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA
                                                                NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




                Annex 4. Statistical treatment of univariate outliers 

Statistical treatment done for the outliers in this report for the univariate indicators are shown in the
figure below. The first step is to build a database of respondents who are in the before and after survey
and eliminate those who don't match. Mter getting a paired data set we start detecting outliers for each
individual indicator. For indicators that can be judged as rational or irrational value, such as yield of paddy
it is unlikely to get a harvest of 10 tons from 1 Ha or for lOR it is unlikely to have a value above 1, we
eliminate the irrational values. The second method is used when we have indicators which might have a
long range of values, such as income, consumption, assets, etc it varies from 0 to 1.000.000.000 for assets,
and then we use a 5% or 10% distribution method. This method depends on the distribution of each
indicator, if the indicator has a wide distribution then we use a 10% limit and when we have a narrow
distribution we use a 5% limit.

Graph of univariate outliers treatment algorithm




                                                                 Eliminate



                               Outlier Diagnostics



                           Method I:                                 Method II : 

                        Subjective Method                          Outlier treatment 

                                                                 based on distribution 


                                                                              I

                  ·  Set up a reasonable cut                ·  Data has a wide
                      off point                                distribution, eliminate
                  ·  Eliminate the data that                   10% of the
                      is above/under the cut                   highest/lowest values.
                      off point                             ·  Data has a narrow
                  Example: For lOR and                         distribution, eliminate
                  yieldIHa                                     5% of the highest/lowest
                                                               values.
                                                            Example: assets, income,
                                                            consumption, expenses, etc




                                                                     ANNEX 4, Statistical treatment of u'ilvanale outliers   77
                                                                     \..               AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA.
                                                                           NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




              Annex 5. Analysis of Soybean Yield in DAFEP Sample

1. Correlation

   o Correlations between Yield and Cultivated area
                               Correlations

                                               Cultivated

 Cu ltiwted Area      Pearson Correlation                     1          -.074
                      Sig. (2-tailed)                                      .585
                      N                                      57               57
 Yie IdIH a           Pearson Correlation               -.074                  1
                      Sig. (2-tailed)                   .585
                      N                                      57               57


The correlation reported in the table is negative, although it is not significantly different from 0 because
the p-value of 0.585 is greater than 0.05.

   o Correlations between Yield and Total input
                               Correlations
                                              YieldlHa            Total input/ha
 YieldlHa            Pearson Correlation                 1                 .221
                     Sig. (2-tailed)                                       .098
                     N                                  57                    57
 Total inputfha      Pearson Correlation            .221                       1
                     Sig. (2-tailed)                .098
                     N                                  57                    57


The correlation is positive and the p-value of 0.098. It indicates that the correlation is not significantly
different from 0 at level 5% but it is significantly significant at level 10%.

2. Association

   o Relationship between Yield and Location
                          OIi-Square Tests
                               Value          df             ~ymp.Sig.
                                                              (2-sided)
 Pearson Chi-Square             12.937a            15                  .607
 Likelihood Ratio               12.655             15                  .629
 N of V'dlid Cases                      57
    a. 20 cells (83.3%) have expected count less than 5. The 

       minimum expected count is .21. 



The significant value of the Chi-square statistic is greater than 0.05. It means that there is no relationship
between yield and location. The chi-square test is useful for determining whether there is a relationship.



                                                                                   ANr-;EX 5. A.nalyss of Soybean Yield ie, DAFEP Sarlple   79
                                                                                                          --------
     AGRIC:JLTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:           ,...,)
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




         o Relationship between Yield and Type ofvariety

                                                            OIi-Square Tests
                                                               Value           df           ~ymp.Sig.
                                                                                              (2-sided)
                                   Pearson Chi-Square           31.412 a        21                   .067
                                   Likelihood Ratio           31.983            21                   .059
                                   N of Valid Cases                57
                                      a. 28 cells (87.5%) have expected count less than 5. The
                                         mi nimu m expected count is .21.


     The significant value of the Chi-square statistic is 0.067. It means that there is no relationship between
     yield and location at level 5%. At level 10%, there is relationship between Yield and Type of variety. The
     Chi-square test doesn't tell you the strength of the relationship. Symmetric measures attempt to quantifY
     this strength. These measures are based on the chi-square statistic.

                                                          Symmetric Measures

                                                                                    Value       ""prox. Sig.
                             Nominal by               Phi                              .742             .067
                             Nominal                  Cramer's V                       .429             .067
                                                      ContingencyCoefficient           .596             .067
                             N of Valid Cases                                            57
                                 a. Not as sum ing the null hypothesis.
                                 b. Using the asymptotic standard error assuming the null
                                    hypothesis.

     The significance values of a1l three measures are 0.067, indicating a statistically significant relationship at
     level 10%. The values ofall three measures are around 0.5; it subjectively indicates the association yield and
     type of variety is not strong enough.


         o Relationship between Yield and Type ofland

                                                            OIl-Square Tests
                                                               Value           df           ~ymp.Sig.
                                                                                       (2-sided)
                                  Pearson Chi-Square          25.051 a          21            .245
                                  Likelihood Ratio            25.247            21            .237
                                  N of Valid Cases                57
                                      a. 28 cells (87.5%) have expected count less than 5. The
                                         minimum expected count is .21.


     The significant value of the Chi-square statistic is greater than 0.05. It means that there is no relationship
     between yield and type of land.




80   ANNEX 5. Aralysl$ of Soybean Yield   DAFEP Sample
                                                              ~                AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                                  NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES



   o  Relationship between Yield and Tenancy

                                             OIi-$quare Tests
                                                 Value               df          /J.s ymp. Sig.
                                                                                       (2-sided)
                       Pearson Chi-Square          4.893 a                6                  .558
                       Likelihood Ratio            5.935                  6                  .430
                       N of Valid Cases                57
                          a. 7 cells (58.3%) have expected count less than 5. The
                             minimum expected count is .63.

The significant value of the Chi-square statistic is greater than 0.05. It means that there is no relationship
between yield and tenancy.




                                    - - - _...   __ ___
                                                     ... ..   ._..   _-_ __ _ _ - - - - - - - - 
                                                                          ..      ..    ..
                                                                    ~                    AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                                            NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES



     Annex 6. Analysis ofInput Efficiency for Paddy in DAFEP Sample

1. Correlation between lOR and variables:

                                                          Correlations
                                                                      lOR     Total InpuVHa            Yield/ha
                  lOR                   Pearson Correlation                 1          -.108'              -.070'
                                        Sig. (2-tailed)                                 .000                .022
                                        N                              1060            1060                1060
                  Total Input/Ha        Pearson Correlation            -.108'              1                .697*
                                        Sig. (2-tailed)                 .000                                .000
                                        N                              1060            1060                1060
                  Yield/ha              Pearson Correlation            -.070*           .697*'                 1
                                        Sig. (2 -tail ed)               .022            .000
                                        N                              1060            1060                   1060
                        '*. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). 

                        *. Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed). 


The correlation reported in the table for Total input/Ha and Yield/Ha towards lOR paddy is negative, and
it is significantly different from 0 because the p-value is smaller than 0.05.


2. Asso ciatlon

   o Relationship between lOR and Type ofVariety.
                                                  Chi-Square Tests
                                                      Value            df         Asymp. Sig.
                                                                                   (2-sided)
                         Pearson Chi-Square            20.358a              12            .061
                         Likelihood Ratio              21.163               12            .048
                         N of Valid Cases                1064
                            a. 4 cells (20.0%) have expected count less than 5. The
                               minimum expected count is .17.
The significant value of the Chi-square statistic is greater than 0.05. It means that there is no relationship
between lOR paddy and type of variety at a 5% significance level, but the relationship is significant at
10%.

                                                     Symmetric Measures

                                                                                 Value        Approx. Sig.
                         Nominal by             Phi                                  .138              .061
                         Nominal                Cramer's V                           .080              .061
                                                Contingency Coefficient              .137              .061
                         N of Valid Cases                                           1064
                            a. Not assuming the null hypothesis.
                            b. Using the asymptotic standard error assuming the null
                               hypothesis.




                                                                       ANNEX 6, AnalYSIS of InPJt EffiCiency for Paddy In DAFEP Sample   83
---.~-.-          ..·   -----                                    --
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA ·
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES
                                                               J
     The significance values of all three measures are 0.061, indicating a statistically significant relationship at
     level 10%. The values of all three measures are around 0.1; it subjectively indicates the association lOR and
     type of variety is not strong enough.

         o  Relationship between lOR and Type of Land:

                                                             Chi-Square Tests
                                                                 Value           df          Asymp. Sig.
                                                                                              (2-sided)
                                   Pearson Chi-Square                31.447 a         28               .298
                                   Likelihood Ratio                  25.202           28               .617
                                   N of Valid Cases                    1064
                                      a. 16 cells (40.0%) have expected count less than 5. The
                                         minimum expected count is .02.


     The significant value of the Chi-square statistic is greater than 0.05. It means that there is no relationship
     between lOR paddy and type ofland is not significant at 5% and 10%.

     o Relationship between lOR and JPAI:
                                                          Symmetric Measures
                                                                                 Asymp. a                b
                                                                     Value      Std. Error       Approx. T        Approx. Sig.
                   Ordinal by            Kendall's tau-b                -.018         .027           -.668               .504
                   Ordinal               Kendall's tau-c                -.014         .021           -.668               .504
                                         Gamma                          -.031         .046           -.668               .504
                                                                                             I
                   N of Valid Cases                                      1064                                 I
                                                                                             ·

                      a. Not assuming the null hypothesis.
                      b. Using the asymptotic standard error assuming the null hypothesis.


     The significant value of the all three measures of ordinal association is greater than 0.05. It means that
     there is no relationship between lOR paddy and JPAI is at 5% and 100/0.

     o Relationship between lOR andJMAO:

                                                           Symmetric Measures
                                                                                 Asymp. a                b
                                                                     Value      Std. Error       Approx. T        Approx. Sig.
                   Ordinal by            Kendall's tau-b                -.018         .027           -.668               .504
                   Ordinal               Kendall's tau-c                -.014         .021           -.668               .504
                                         Gamma                          -.031         .046           -.668    I          .504
                   N of Valid Cases                                      1064                                 I
                      a. Not assuming the null hypothesis.
                      b. Using the asymptotic standard error assuming the null hypothesis.

     The significant value of the all three measures of ordinal association is greater than 0.05. It means that
     there is no relationship between lOR paddy and JMAO at 5% and 10%.




84                                                    DAfEP Sample
                                                        "-.            AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:
                                                              NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES




                                          REFERENCES

Alex, G, Byerlee, D, Collion, M, and Rivera, W. 2004 Extension and Rural Development: Converging
Views en Institutional Approaches. ARD discussion Paper 4, April. The World Bank.

Alex, G., W. Zijp, D. Byerlee, et al. 2002b. Rural Extension andAdvisory Services: New Directions. Rural
Development Strategy Background Paper #9. Washington, D.C.: Agriculture & Rural Development
Deparment, World Bank.

Anderson, J, Feder, G, and S. Ganguly. 2006. Ihe Rise and Fall if Training and Visit Extension, World
Bank Policy Research Working Paper no. 3928.

Bourgeois R. and F. Jesus (2002). Technical Assistance to the Benchmark Study, Final Report. CIRAD,
Jakana.

CIRADIIDE-FORCE (2000). DAFEP, Guidelines/or the Benchmark Survey. CIRAD,Jakarta.

-----------------------------------. DAFEP, Report if the Pilot Benchmark Study. CIRAD, Jakarta.

Christoplos 1., and A. Kidd (2000). Guide for Monitoring, Evaluation and Joint Analyses              0/ Pluralistic
Extension Support. Neuchatel Initiative, LBL, Lindau.

Deaton, A. (1997). Ihe Analysis if Household Surveys: a Microeconometric Approach to Development Policy.
Washington D.C. and Baltimore: ~lhe World Bank and Johns Hopkins University Press.

Efron B. ans R.J. Tibshirani (1993). An introduction to the bootstrap. Chapman & Hall.

Fallon A. and C. Spada (1997). Environmental Sampling and M=onitoring Primer: Detection and
Accommodation ~f Outliers in Normally Distributed Data Sets. Virginia Tech. http://ewr.cee.vt.edul
environrnentallteachlsmprimerloutlierloutlier.html.

Faure, G. and P. Kleene (2004). Lessons from New Experiences in Extension in West Africa: Management
Advicefor J;amily .Farms and Farmers' Organizations. JAEE, vol 10, No 1, pp 37-49

Iglewicz. B. and D. C Hoaglin (1993). How to Detect and Handle Outliers. American Society for Qyality
Control, Milwaukee, WI

National Centre for Agricultural Extension (1999). DA.FEP Project Implementation Plan                    Annexes.
Ministry ofAgriculture, Jakarta.

PT. Hutamacipta Konsulindo (2002). Benchmark Study Final Report. Jakarta.

Rivera, W. 1996. Agricultural Extension in Transition Worldwide. Public Administration and Development,
Vol. 16, pp. 151-161.

 Rivera, VvT and Gustafson, D. 1991 eds. Agricultural Extension: Worldwide Institutional Evolution and .Forces
for Change. Elsevier, Amsterdam




                                                                                                                       85
     AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN INDONESIA:       .,)
     NEW APPROACHES AND EMERGING ISSUES



     Rivera, Wand Zijp, W (eds). 2002. Contractingfor Agricultural Extension: International Case Studies and
     Emerging Practices (CABI:Wallingford, UK)

     Salant P. and D. A. Dillman (1994). How to conduct your own survey. New York: John Wiley and Sons.

     SMERU Research Institute. 2004. Decentralization andAgricultural Service Delivery- Benchmarks, Transfers
     and Capacity Building in Intergovernmental Relations

     T ukey J.\V. (1977). Exploratory Data Analysis. Addison- Wesley, Reading, Mass. 


     World Bank, 2000. Full Supervision Report (Office Memorandum), September 6,2000, Jakarta. 


     World Bank, 2005. Iriformation and Communication Technologies for Rural Development. Washington 

     D.C

     World Bank, 2006. Making the New Indonesia Workfor the Poor, Washington, D.C

     World Bank2007a Spendingfor Development: Indonesia Public Expenditure Review, \Vashington, D.C

     World Bank, 2007b             Issues in Indonesian Rice Policy, forthcoming




86   References
